Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Anxiety Audio Articles The following articles have audio versions: 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Describes 50 evidence-based tools from cognitive-behavioral therapy for coping with anxiety disorders. How to Manage Panic and Anxiety Explains what panic is and is not, how it is maintained by the anxiety cycle, and some methods to learn how to control it. Coping with Change: Psychological Flexibility Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help Explains the biology of the stress reaction and how cognitive-behavioral therapy impacts that process at the biological level. How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? Provides an overview of how cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) works. Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Examines catastrophic thinking which is the tendency to assume the worst-case scenario is likely to occur. Use Your Head! And Your Heart! Describes emotional reasoning which is the tendency to believe emotions are accurate without evaluating them. Excellence vs. Perfection Compares perfectionistic thinking with striving for excellence. But It Happened Before! Generalizing is the irrational belief that because something occurred one time it is more likely to occur again. When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control Examines the Internal Control Fallacy of needing to be in control and responsible for everything and the External Control Fallacy which is believing everything that happens is due to luck or uncontrollable circumstances. Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary Describes how to change irrational thinking styles by using the cognitive diary technique. Why are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? Discusses the relaxation and different methods. Good introduction before using relaxation and mindfulness audios. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Motivation Hot Air Balloon Motivation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Finding Your Path Decision-Making If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Risk and Planning for Success If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download "Intrinsic motivation...is an internal form of motivation. You strive towards a goal for personal satisfaction or accomplishment." "I have so many great ideas, if only I could get motivated." "I do well with deadlines, but I can't seem to motivate myself." "I can't seem to lose weight unless I have someone constantly checking on me and I can't afford a personal trainer." "I would perform better if I could make myself practice more." Do any of these sound familiar? What the above statements havein common is the individual's need for extrinsic motivation for follow-through, the inability to achieve a desired goal unless someone else provides the impetus to pursue the goal. Without the development of intrinsic motivation, individuals have a great deal of difficulty achieving success in almost any area. If you examine successful people, one of the main differences is their ability to motivate themselves. They are not necessarily more intelligent, or have better ideas, or have better luck; they are just able to pursue a goal to its conclusion. Read more... Hot Air Balloon Motivation Although this audio uses imagery for relaxation and can be used just for the calming experience, the focus of the audio is encouragement and motivation. Once you achieve a state of relaxation, listening to the motivational statements can increase your self-confidence and belief in your ability to achieve your goals. This audio is meant to be listened to repeatedly to help increase your positive self-talk regarding achieving your goals. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Listen PsychNotes An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Life is Like...Planning a New Vegetable Garden Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? Helping Children Achieve Their Potential How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Do We Really WANT to Educate Our Children? Do You Want an Education or Do You Want a Grade? Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? Why Set Goals If 50% of New Year's Resolutions are Broken by Three Months? What Determines the Success of New Year's Resolutions? Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Listening to Your Heart Helps Moral Decision-Making: But is it Good for Fear Avoidance Decisions? Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Improving Attention and Quality of Effort How Both Overly Positive and Negative Misperceptions of Performance Can Affect You Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Some people may be curious as to why this website is dedicated to the "pursuit of excellence" when I am constantly warning about the dangers of perfectionism. To address this question we must differentiate between the pursuit of excellence and the need to be perfect. These concepts are not only different but can be considered antagonistic to one another. In fact these concepts are so opposed to one another that excellence can best be attained by giving up the demands of perfection. Read more... Although we may prefer to believe that learning a motor skill is purely learning a set of physical techniques, we have to consider that most learning typically takes place in the context of an interpersonal relationship with a teacher. The critical question is how does this interaction affect the development of motor skills. It appears that the mediating factor between the presentation of the instructions by the teacher and the performance of the skill by the student may be the cognitive process of self-efficacy (Escarti & Guzman, 1999). Some may argue that the development of effective skills may lead to the increased self-efficacy demonstrated by students of high ability. Although this process occurs, it is not sufficient for explaining the role of developing self-efficacy and its impact on learning motor skills. To fully explain the role of self-efficacy, we must evaluate the interpersonal context of how the teacher or coach provides feedback to the athlete, how that feedback affects self-efficacy, and how self-efficacy enhances performance. Unfortunately, studies directly examining this relationship are sparse, and therefore, the inferences need to be made based on research examining the relation of the different components of the equation such as the feedback/self-efficacy relationship and the self-efficacy/motor skills relationship. Read more... Without confidence in ones ability, an individual cannot perform to his or her potential. It is even possible that someone with lesser ability, but with confidence, can outperform this person because belief in oneself can be a powerful influence. What is this sense of confidence? Albert Bandura refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity. The concept of self-efficacy has often been used interchangeably with the concept of self-esteem which is the process of evaluating the self; however, self-efficacy is more accurately described as a precursor to self-esteem and is mediated by the individuals self-attributions. Read more... Training smart is more important than the amount of daily practice. Too often an athlete believes that the more he or she practices, the more proficient he/she will become. However, this plan is not only ineffective, but it can also be detrimental to achieving the desired outcome. An athlete who practices frequently and hard without an overall plan will be more likely to suffer the effects of overtraining such as burn-out, exhaustion, and increased injuries rather than actually improving performance. By developing a set of specific goals and a plan for reaching those goals, athletes can more effectively use their practice time and even reduce the time required in practice to attain their goals. Obviously, this does not mean that the martial artist can achieve rank or win tournaments with little practice; it means that the athlete does not need to waste time through ineffective practice and through the harmful effects of overtraining. Read more... Assessing performance and correcting errors are important internal skills for the martial arts student to develop. But how does one develop this skill? To do so, the martial arts instructor needs to consciously teach skill just as he or she teaches proper execution of a side kick or using faking techniques during sparring. However, teaching the development of using internal sources of information for feedback may be something many martial arts instructors were not taught themselves. So often when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence. Read more... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Research-based Psychological Tests The following tests have been developed through research and shown to be able to categorize different behaviors, traits, or conditions. Although they were developed using statistical methods and standard research procedures, they are not meant to be used as a diagnostic tool in isolation. In other words, they can provide you with some information about yourself but to be fully diagnosed you need to be evaluated by a professional. Get paid for your opinion! Anxiety Depression Cognitive Styles Happiness Personality Rejection Sensitivity Relationships Self-Concept Anxiety GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder This test measures whether you may have an anxiety disorder, particularly generalized anxiety disorder which is characterized by excessive worry. Willoughby Social Anxiety Scale This test assesses the degree to which a person is socially anxious. High scores can indicate Social Anxiety Disorder. Depression CES-Depression This test screens for clinical depression. Cognitive Styles Cognitive Styles Test This is a 110 item test examining 13 styles of thinking that can lead to problems in relationships, problems at work or in school, and problems coping with life stressors. These styles include: Anxious Style, Self-Esteem Style, Perfectionistic Style, Approval-Seeking Style, Demand Style, Withholding Style, Control Style, Dependency Style, Externalizing Style, Emotional Style, Passivity Style, Trust Style, and Blaming Style Perceived Control Scale (Locus of Control) This test assesses the degree of control that you feel you have in three major areas of life: personal achievement, interpersonal relationships, and political institutions. Happiness Your Happiness Assessment This test is 119 items and assesses 14 areas of self-improvement that can help create the conditions for happiness: optimism, illness susceptibility, locus of control, compassion, trusting of others, affiliation, pleasantness, emotional stability, conscientiousness, assertiveness, self-confidence, gratefulness, approval-seeking, and playfulness. Positive Generalization Scale This test assesses the tendency to have positive expectations based upon previous experience. Satisfaction With Life Scale This scale assesses the degree to which a person is satisfied in life or may need to address some areas of dissatisfaction. Personality Are You a Leader? This test assesses personality characteristics that are related to leadership qualities including tendency to lead, to be assertive and goal-oriented, and ability to cooperate. Perfectionist or Efficient? This test assesses personality characteristics that are related to perfectionism, efficiency, organization, and goal orientation. How Social Are You? This test assesses personality characteristics that are related to how social you are. Specifically, it rates how extroverted or introverted you are. Rejection Sensitivity Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire (Adult Version) This test assesses the degree to which a person is sensitive to rejection by others. The adult version is for those beyond college age. Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire (Young Adult Version) This questionnaire assesses the degree to which a person is sensitive to rejection by others. The young adult version is for those of college age. Appearance Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire This questionnaire assesses the degree to which a person is sensitive to rejection by others due to their appearance. Relationships Marital Disillusionment Questionnaire This questionnaire assesses your feelings about your marriage particularly whether you have become disillusioned with it which indicates dissatisfaction and losing faith or trust in your marriage. Measure of Attachment Qualities (Attachment Insecurity) This questionnaire assesses attachment tendencies and resulting anxiety and avoidance. Self-Concept General Self-Esteem This test measures general self-esteem which is the attitude you have towards yourself. General Self-Efficacy This questionnaire measures general self-efficacy which is your belief that you can handle situations so as to successfully attain your goals. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Forgiveness and the Process of Healing by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet Ultimately, healing is within each of us. But have patience with the process and recognize you may address the issues at different levels until one day you realize that you haven't been reacting in the old ways and that you have healed. The following letter from a website user brings up a number of issues regarding forgiveness, particularly towards a toxic parent: I found your essays while searching for information about the inability to forgive. I prefer your perspective to many others. I also have a question for your consideration: if I'm finding an old issue that I had sincerely forgiven in the past comes back up with intense resentment and anger within me, could that mean...that somehow I believe that the anger and resentment will 'punish' me enough to make me learn and prevent me from making the choices that have resulted in this particular situation? It keeps my thoughts in the past which makes it very difficult to function and make good decisions NOW, but at the same time it keeps me so afraid that it creates large distances between me and the person I resent which, in the larger perspective, is protecting me from the threat. I mean, perhaps I cannot change this about myself. Perhaps although I am offended at my emotions and behavior, it is a defense mechanism that works better than not having it at all. Perhaps when I hear criticism of my childishness, resentment, inability to let go, inability to forgive, I should just accept it and say yes, that is true about this particular issue, and I am going to have to be okay with it rather than continue to feel guilty and ashamed for my shallow character and lack of ability to overcome this. This person is struggling with how to forgive a toxic parent so that she can move on in her life. However, she finds herself returning to the resentment and anger because the parent is still part of her life. The question here is how can she forgive so she does not continue to be harmed by the anger and resentment while still maintaining a relationship with this parent? I will address the following issues in this article: Forgiving too quickly. How we heal from betrayal and trauma. The special case of toxic parents. Before I address these issues, I want to clarify how I see forgiveness. I'm referring to the concept of forgiveness in this article because the writer asked about forgiveness. However, I think of forgiveness not as something that addresses the other person but as a completion of the healing process. It is not about saying I forgive you to the transgressor, but is about feeling at peace and no longer reacting intensely to the past transgressions of the other person. It is about being able to have compassion for the transgressor (which will have to be addressed in another article). The Demand to Forgive Good people believe they need to forgive. Sometimes, though, good people have been harmed by toxic people. And continued to be harmed by those people or people similar to them. This demand to forgive often causes them to forgive before they are ready. I often find that people who say I have forgiven usually haven't. Why do I think this? Because when we have fully resolved a situation and forgiven, it usually sneaks up on us and we aren't even aware that we have forgiven unless something brings our attention to it. People who declare I have forgiven are too intent on proving that the issue is resolved. As Shakespeare said in Hamlet "The lady doth protest too much, methinks" those who are defensive are frequently indicating the opposite of what they say. I should be able able to forgive. Why do people feel the need to forgive immediately? Several possible reasons can create this demand which is a form of denial of the emotions involved in the grief process necessary to resolve transgressions: 1) Religious or moral beliefs. Sometimes people believe their religious beliefs demand immediate forgiveness, and therefore, if they don't forgive right away they are displeasing God. However, many times this is a misunderstanding of the religious beliefs and most spiritual leaders understand forgiveness as a process that may take time. If you believe immediate forgiveness is demanded by your religion, I would encourage you to discuss it with your spiritual guide to determine if your understanding is correct. 2) Feel defective. Some people believe they are defective if they don't forgive easily. This may be an internal belief which probably arose from childhood teachings or observations of the ease at which others seem to forgive. However, we don't observe others' process, only the outcome. Or, it may be that others expect you to forgive and will admonish you for not doing so. Often such criticism is due to the other person's discomfort. Frequently, such a demand comes from the transgressor or from someone close who has a goal of keeping the peace. In those cases, they have a personal agenda of wanting you to forgive so they don't have to feel bad. 3) Demand to move on. Just as the transgressor doesn't want to feel bad, you don't want to continue to feel bad, either. Frequently, people demand of themselves to forgive so they can quit feeling bad. They want to put the situation behind them and move on in their livesto get past it. What they are trying to bypass, however, is the core of the process of forgivenesswe need to go through the emotional states caused by the loss to truly come to a resolution (the process of grief). Also, people fear what might happen if they don't forgive. Sometimes people are afraid that if they don't heal, they won't be happy, they won't find a good relationship, or a multitude of other desires for their life. So they demand a quick solution. I thought I had already dealt with this issue. When you thought you had resolved and forgiven a transgression and it arises again with intense anger and resentment, it could be due to several reasons: 1) The transgressor is still causing hurt. Don't be too quick to assume that anger and resentment is due to unresolved issues, and if you forgive, the anger will subside. Anger is also a protective mechanism. It alerts us to problems so that we can protect ourselves and prevent further harm. In the writer's situation, the parent is still engaged in toxic behaviors such as diminishing the writer's feelings and shaming her. Therefore, the anger is a message that says It is not about you. You are doing nothing wrong. It is how this other person is treating you. The writer stated, it keeps me so afraid that it creates large distances between me and the person I resent which, in the larger perspective, is protecting me from the threat. In this way, the anger subconsciously directed her behavior to protect her. However, she can do that more directly by listening to the message of the anger, shoring up her defenses and protecting herself from ongoing hurt in the way she thinks is best rather than letting her subconscious choose for her. Perhaps she can't stop her mother's behavior, but she can stop the impact of her mother's behavior. Instead of feeling guilt and shame, she can use her anger to stand up for herself: No, you are wrong to treat me this way. These words don't need to be said to the parent (although it is okay to do so) but at least need to be said internally so that she doesn't continue to doubt herself. In addition, keep in mind that forgiveness does not mean you have to trust someone. Nor does it mean you should put yourself in a position where they can continue to hurt you. 2) Something in the present requires your attention. Similar to when the transgressor is still causing hurt, sometimes other situations may cause similar pain even though the toxic person is not involved. For instance, if someone criticizes and shames you, it may bring up the anger and resentment towards the original transgressor, the parent. Again, the purpose of this anger is to protect you. By recognizing the similarities and that someone is treating you poorly, it allows you to take the necessary steps to protect yourself. Perhaps another way of thinking about this is that the old feelings have been triggered by something in the present which means you need to attend to the present situation. 3) It was not truly resolved. This is not a bad thing. As I will describe in the next section, healing is a process that has multiple layers to it and even though you may have resolved one aspect of the issue, there may be other aspects for you to address. Therefore, it does not mean you haven't forgiven, but means that you forgave at one level but there is yet more to resolve. The Recursive Process of Healing Often people think of healing, if shown on a graph, as a straight line rising upward showing progress. Although they recognize healing has its ups and downs, they still expect movement to average out to a straight line showing improvement. Thinking of progress this way, if they return to a familiar issue they believe they have already dealt with, they think of it as backsliding and feel like they are starting over. However, I like the concept of recursion which I think describes more accurately what people experience when they are healing. The word recursion comes from computer science and refers to a method of programming where the ultimate solution to a problem depends upon having solved previous aspects of that problem. To best explain the recursive process, think of a spiral staircase. What you see, instead of a straight line, is a line that proceeds in a circular fashion but rising from level to level. When you walk to a higher level on a spiral staircase and look at the view it is the same as what you saw at the same point on the lower level but your perspective has changed. You now see it in a different way from the higher viewpoint. Many times my clients will say I thought I resolved this issue. Why am I dealing with it again? If you think of progress as a spiral, you can see that it is rising from level to level. However, as you proceed through each level you come back again and again to the same pointthe same issue. But you're returning to that issue at a higher level with a different perspective. I think this describes how we heal from the emotional traumas, losses, and suffering in our lives. We return to an issue again and again. Although this may seem to be regression (going backwards) if we represent it as a straight line, if we think of it as a spiral we can see we are moving upwards and dealing with the same issue albeit in a different way. For instance, many people are familiar with the stages of grief: denial, anger, sadness, and acceptance. What they don't realize is these stages may overlap, proceed in a different order and reoccur as we face different life challenges. A toxic parent has caused much devastation for a child, now adult, much of which may go unrecognized initially. Therefore, as a survivor of a toxic parent (or other childhood abuse) proceeds through life, s/he may be slapped in the face again and again with the consequences of such an upbringing. A person who is working on resolving the impact of the childhood trauma may think s/he has moved on but then discovers another emotional reaction or consequence of the toxic parenting. Maybe s/he attends the deathbed of the spouse's parent and sees the loving family relationships, the pure grief, and the celebration of life in the normal family experience and the contrast with her/his experience of conflict, love as an obligation, and fear and confusion. The consequences of trauma impacts a person repeatedly and profoundly throughout the lifetime, but a person can only process a piece of that trauma at a time. Otherwise, it is overwhelming. So, instead of saying I've moved on it is more accurate to say I've resolved this level but I'm sure I'll revisit it again. I know this is not comfortable for people. We want to put pain and suffering behind us. We don't want to visit it again. But one thing I've found in my own life is that as I proceed through the levels it becomes less and less painful. In fact, sometimes I can anticipate the next level with curiosity I wonder what my next lesson will be? I think this comes with the change of perspective and not expecting that life should be pain-free. I see life as an ongoing process of growththere is always more to learn. The straight line concept implies one path with a a final destination. The spiral seems to be more consistent with concept of life-long learning. One way to think of this process of growth is that each of us has our primary life issue which we will return to again and again if we allow it. By accepting that it is never fully resolved we can be more at peace when we do return to it. Instead of fighting it with But I thought I was done with that! we can recognize that this issue is part of the puzzle of who we are and begin to perhaps even enjoy that path of self-discovery. Many people like being able to take a walk and see something new around the turn of the path or traveling to another country to visit with different people or see one of the wonders of the world. Self-discovery can be similar,, looking forward to finding the next nugget of treasure that is who we are. I know this perspective may not be the view you have at the present time. When people are judgmental or critical of themselves, they are fearful of what they may discover. And that is what I mean by changing perspective. As you move up the levels in your journey, at some point you may not need to be critical of yourself and can view the situation in a different way. At some point you may develop a greater tolerance of pain or may not even experience pain in the same manner. At some point you may be able to look forward to the next life lesson. But the point here is that you cannot will that to happen. The desire to bypass all the uncomfortable aspects of self-growth shows there is still much to learn. The desire to be at the top level, to be finished, is an indicator of what still needs to be learned because that desire shows a lack of understanding of the value of life's lessons and the inability to tolerate discomfort. Sometimes we will be in denial about our life issue or want to avoid it. And that is okay. That is part of the journey. During these times, when I see myself on a side path, I look over at my primary path and say I know that's where I'm supposed to be but maybe there's something I need to learn from this side path. I will get back to the main path when I'm ready. The spiral concept allows us to accept where we are because we are sill proceeding forward even if we return to the same issue. Therefore, it is not that the issue was or wasn't resolvedit's that it was resolved at the previous level and now we are at another level. Life gives us many opportunities for lessons if we allow it. But to allow it we may need to be uncomfortable. We may not be able to tie up all the loose ends and feel satisfied. Life provides many things but complete and ongoing satisfaction is not among them and if we can learn to tolerate that we can proceed through a lifetime of lessons with anticipation, curiosity, and even contentment. Attachment to Toxic Parents and the Need for Protection After contemplation of these issues I just presented, the website reader responded: I have come to believe, since then, that the reason these things recur is because although I want to forgive something in order to be a better person, I cannot simply will it to happen. A perfect example is the resentment of being abandoned multiple times as a child only to be punished by my mother with resentment for having to be a parent upon return. I have spent my life either resenting her, or wanting life to be better so much that I decide that I can forgive and move forward, only to not like her at some point, and eventually become resentful of the present and the past. The real issue is the inability to let go of the attachment to her. I am actually worried that I will lose control of my mental stability, such as it is, when my parent dies because I do not forgive her and I cannot forgive myself for wanting her approval...or for wanting to be better than I am and rise above...both of which have not been successful because her approval comes only when I put myself below her. I seek a way to heal before she is gone because I fear it needs to involve her and I could miss my opportunity. On the other hand...it is always available within us...like an attitude...like a belief...like a memory...something that we have to put forth effort to maintain. When a person has a toxic parent, several issues regarding forgiveness often arise causing an abnormal attachment to the parent which interferes with the need for protection. Many people with toxic parents say I don't understand it. I KNOW my parent continues to hurt me and doesn't care for my needs, yet I feel I need to be there for her and I'm afraid of losing her. By understanding this attachment, you can more easily move through the process of forgiveness and be better able to protect yourself from the parent and other similar people. 1) Fear of abandonment. Part of this issue is that the fear of abandonment is greater than the fear of being hurt by the parent. Often this is due to neglect, abandonment, or the threat of abandonment in childhood. It feels worse to the child to believe My parent doesn't love me which is translated, then, to I'm not lovable than to believe She's rightI'm bad. I need to be better. As a result, some people hold on to the attachment even though it means viewing the self in a negative way rather than accepting that the parent is incapable of genuine and unconditional love. It is normal for a child to come to the conclusion that if my own parent can't love me, I must not be lovable but an adult can challenge that belief and recognize that the failing is in the parent, not the child. 2) Need to grieve the loss of the parental image. The other aspect of attachment, is that it is not necessarily to the parent but to the "image" of the parent. I have worked with people many times when they have been abused or neglected by a parent and believe that they have grieved and forgiven the parent. The problem is often they haven't grieved their true loss: the fact that their parent will never be the parent they want or deserve (their "image" of the parent). They are in denial of that loss and so they continue in the same pattern with the parent hoping they can have and trying to create the relationship they want which will never be. Once they have fully grieved the loss of the image and recognize they can never have the parent they want, then they can begin to determine what type of relationship is possible with the parent (based upon what that parent is capable of, not based on their "image"). 3) Letting go of the outmoded messages. When you have a toxic parent, you learned certain ways of thinking that continue to impact you until you recognize them and release them. For example, many people who have toxic parents will protest, I HAVE to love her. She's my mother. Interestingly, I have never heard this statement from people who grow up in normal families. In other words, dysfunctional families teach certain rules. One such rule is You will love your family because we are your family which means no matter how we treat you, you will love us. In normal families, however, people love one another because of how they are treated. When you are treated with love, you return love. It is not love by obligation. Other messages people learn is that they need to let go of their anger and forgive the transgressions by their family members. Interestingly, these same family members often hold grudges against others.. Yet, the truth is, we cannot will forgiveness and it does not make us shallow if we have not overcome a transgression against us. Forgiveness is a process that occurs at its own pace in its own way. We need to trust the process. By doing so, it allows us to experience whatever feelings are necessary for resolutionno matter how uncomfortable those feelings may be or how unacceptable we may believe them to be. If we decide in advance which feelings are okay and which are not, then we are not able to address them fully, may not be able to learn the necessary lessons from the process, and therefore, do not achieve resolution. 4) Healing doesn't have to involve the transgressor. Healing does not necessarily involve the parent. If the parent is able to listen to the anger in an accepting way, then the parent can be helpful in the process. However, that is often not true especially with toxic parents. So, healing often does not involve the transgressor. In fact, in some situations it is better to not involve the toxic parent as they are more likely to interfere with the process than help it. However, one reason to heal prior to the death of the parent (if possible) is because having a different kind of relationship with that parent can empower you. For instance, when you don't accept the criticism, when you can confront the behavior of the parent, when you can see yourself as separate from the parent and value yourself no matter how your parent treats you, you will feel more powerful and confident in yourself. And not just in that relationship, but in all relationships. However, that opportunity is not always available, but healing is. Ultimately, healing is within each of us. But have patience with the process and recognize you may address the issues at different levels until one day you realize that you haven't been reacting in the old ways and that you have healed. Copyright 2015 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Stress: 50 Suggestions--page 1 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...although stress does not directly cause health problems typically, it does indirectly influence many, if not most, health conditions..." Tweet Some of the following suggestions are similar to the list of suggestions for happiness or depression. This is because some of the same techniques will work for different problems. However, this list is also specifically focused on the issue of stress. SUGGESTION 1: USING THE SUGGESTIONS When people are stressed, they tend to reduce the amount of self-care in which they engage. Frequently, they have the attitude "I don't have time to take care of myself. I'm too stressed!" However, when you don't have the time to take care of yourself or to relax is when you most need to do so. Although it can be hard to make yourself take the time you need to manage the stress you experience, research has shown that if those reacting to stress can increase their use of coping methods, they will be able to manage stressors in their lives much better. In addition, although stress does not directly cause health problems typically, it does indirectly influence many, if not most, health conditions whether it is a physical condition such as diabetes or heart disease or whether it is a psychiatric condition such as depression. Therefore, learning to regularly use coping methods to manage the stress in your life will also help improve your overall health. The following list of suggestions are things you can do to help you learn to cope with the stress you experience to reduce the physical impact on you. Some of them are simpler and some are more involved. It is better to start with something simple that you feel fairly certain you can achieve. That way you are less likely to feel discouraged. Not all the suggestions are relevant for all people. So, review the list, read the detailed descriptions, and choose what is most likely to work for you. As you review the suggestion list you may find that you are already doing some of the suggestions. However, you may not be giving yourself credit for the positive or healthy things you do for yourself. Keeping track of the positive things can help you focus in a different way. The Stress Journal included in this app allows you to keep a list of things to do about your stress as well as tasks you have completed. In addition, you can include positive outcomes in the journal. Try to do at least one of the suggestions a day. As you are able, try to do more. Remember that none of these suggestions are meant to take the place of the advice of your mental health professional. They are meant to be an aid to other assistance you may be getting. READ MORE: page 2 Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Jealousy Articles WHEN IS JEALOUSY IRRATIONAL? Describes how to identify irrational jealousy and how it impacts relationships. WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR JEALOUSY THREATENS TO DESTROY YOUR MARRIAGE Describes the destructiveness of irrational jealousy and how to make changes. WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR PARTNER'S JEALOUSY THREATENS TO DESTROY YOUR RELATIONSHIP Discusses how to respond to a partner's irrational jealousy. REJECTION SENSITIVITY, IRRATIONAL JEALOUSY, & IMPACT ON RELATIONSHIPS Examines the fear of rejection, its relation to irrational jealousy, and how it negatively affects relationships. JEALOUSY: WHEN THE DAMAGE IS DONE Discusses what to do when the irrational jealousy has already seriously harmed the relationship. WHEN YOU HAVE BEEN BETRAYED Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Sport Psychology Articles WHAT IS SPORT PSYCHOLOGY? Defines sport psychology. EFFECTS OF INTENSITY ON PERFORMANCE Understanding the concept of intensity can improve athletic performance. PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT IN THE MARTIAL ARTS: A REVIEW Reviews the sport psychology research regarding improving performance in martial arts. Also, applies to other sports. EFFECTS OF INTENSITY ON PERFORMANCE Discusses the concept of an optimal level of intensity for best performance. WHEN ANXIETY INTERFERES WITH PERFORMANCE: TRANSFERING PRACTICE Discusses how to transfer practice skills to real-life situations. ASSESSING AND COPING WITH INJURIES Discusses how to psychologically cope with injuries. SETTING GOALS TO MAXIMIZE PERFORMANCE Discusses how to set athletic goals to achieve maximum performance. FEEDBACK, SELF-EFFICACY, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOTOR SKILLS How to teach to increase internal motivation for developing physical skills. GIVING WOMEN FEEDBACK TO INCREASE SELF-EFFICACY Improving self-efficacy increases internal motivation. SELF-EFFICACY: THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN SPORTS Defines self-efficacy and how it impacts performance in sports. CHALLENGING PERFECTIONISTIC DEMANDS Discusses how perfectionistic expectations can interfere with martial arts performance. EXERCISE AND THE SELF-ESTEEM CYCLE Describes how self-esteem influences exercise tendencies and how exercise improves self-esteem. TEACHING SELF-CORRECTION Discusses the importance of self-correction for athletes and how to teach self-correction. ISSUES WHEN ENDING A SPORTS CAREER Athletes often have difficulty when ending careers due to not recognizing the losses involved. PERSONALITY TESTING IN SPORTS: SHOULD WE OR SHOULDN'T WE? Examines the role of personality testing in sports. DEVELOPING FOCUS Discusses the importance of focus in martial arts training and how to improve focus. GOAL-SETTING FOR A SPORTS TEAM Discusses why the development of specific goals is important for success in sports. SELF-EFFICACY: THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN SPORTS Explains the concept of self-efficacy and how it impacts athletic success. TEACHING SELF-CORRECTION Explains the concept of self-correction and how to enhance an athlete's ability to correct mistakes. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "Our thinking is very changeable. If you worked on changing your thinking everyday by reading, listening to the audio exercises, and completing a cognitive diary you will find your thinking changing even within a few weeks." Tweet As you may realize as you read the articles on this site, the underlying core issue for many problems resides with irrational thinking styles. That, of course, is the basic premise of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). We develop styles of thinking based upon our learning experiences, our parents' thinking, and societal/community beliefs and expectations. Learning Experiences. When we are growing up, we have many experiences and the outcome of these experiences contribute to beliefs or ways of thinking that we develop. For instance, as a child I was very shy and fearful of speaking in public due to fear of making a mistake and being ridiculed. In the 7th grade I had a teacher who encouraged me to attend speech competitions. I was so excited that she thought I could be good at this that I was willing to face my fear and engage in speech competitions which I continued even throughout high school. As a result, I developed the belief "Even though talking in front of people causes anxiety I am capable of doing it." Now, if I had not had that experience and my main experience was being embarrassed in front of my class because I couldn't say the word "peculiar" when I was reading out loud (it sounds different than it looks and I couldn't get my brain to switch from the visual to the auditory because I was so anxious), I may have developed the belief "Talking in front of people leads to embarrassment which I must avoid." The problem that causes this belief to be irrational is that it is black and white--it leaves no room for alternatives. I would be assuming that talking in front of people always leads to embarrassment. Instead, by doing speech competitions I learned that talking in front of people could be enjoyable and could lead to awards. Trauma is an important subset of learning experiences that severely affects an individual's belief system. For example, an individual who survived a fire has a fear of low probability catastrophes. Due to the fact that a low probability catastrophe occurred to him or her, it is more difficult to challenge the thinking with a statement such as "It is unlikely to occur." Or a person who was raped and then told it was her fault because she left her door unlocked may tend to unreasonably blame herself for things that happen. Parents' Thinking. Sometimes our parents teach us irrational thinking directly such as "What would the neighbors think?" if they saw a dirty house implying that the neighbors would think we are bad people because the dishes aren't done and the beds aren't made. They may catastrophize about situations and pass their worries onto us "I don't want to fly because the airplane might crash." Often, they don't recognize that their thinking is irrational and so they don't tell us there might be alternative ways to think. For instance, they don't typically say "I have an irrational fear of crashing but airplance travel is actually the safest form of travel. Even if our parents don't directly tell us how to think, they impart certain ways of thinking based on their behavior and how they handle situations. For instance, I remember my father speeding past a bunch of cars and then coming to a stoplight which caused all the cars he had passed to catch up with him and he slammed his hand on the steering wheel and said "They're all laughing at me." At first I was confused, but then I came to understand what he meant and that others laughing at him was a catastrophe. From this I came to learn that I had to be careful in how I behaved so that people wouldn't have the opportunity to laugh at me. Societal/Community Beliefs and Expectations. We learn a great deal of thinking based on the culture we grow up in. For instance, a professor of mine once described his experience as a teacher in the Virgin Islands. He said they did not have the same concept of time that we do in the U.S. College students in the U.S. typically arrive to class on time but as soon as the class is over they are out the door even if the instructor is in mid-sentence. However, in the Virgin Islands college students might arrive 20-30 minutes late but they also tended to stay longer and be involved in discussions after class. Neither of these scenarios are right or wrong, they are just different behaviors based upon cultural influences. However, sometimes those societal beliefs and expectations can lead to problematic behaviors. Here in the U.S. the perfectionistic tendencies that are imparted to us as we grow up can lead to being overwhelmed and not trying. I believe much of our problem as a society with obesity can be related to these attitudes: "I can't make myself stay on a diet and exercise daily, so why should I bother trying?" (see Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight) Cognitive Restructuring Therefore, due to these various influences we develop our thinking styles, both rational and irrational. You may already recognize some of your irrational thinking styles and how they developed, but you want to know, "How do I change this thinking?" In fact, many times you've probably have had people tell you "Think this way!" But no one tells you how to "Think this way!" So, you still have the question, "How do I think that way?" The answer is that you are already halfway there. Half of the battle is recognizing the thinking that is problematic for you. You can do this by reading other articles on this site as well as the recommended books. The next step however, is the part that requires more active work and that is challenging the thinking, repeatedly and often. This part of therapy is known as "cognitive restructuring." To learn any new skill, we first have to identify how to complete the skill correctly and then we have to practice the skill repeatedly. So, for instance, if you want to learn how to hit a ball with a bat, you need to learn how to hold the bat and how to stand and when to swing. But, just because you know intellectually how to hit a ball doesn't mean that you will be able to. The next step is to practice swinging the bat at the ball and adjusting your stance until you can hit the ball. However, even then it doesn't mean that you can automatically hit the ball whenever it is thrown to you. At this point you need to practice swinging the bat at the ball again and again until you develop the muscle memory to do it automatically. That way, when you are under the stress of two outs in the ninth inning, you will be able to automatically engage in the behavior you need to hit the ball. Well, learning a new way of thinking is learning a new thinking skill and the process is the same as learning to hit a ball with a bat. You need to identify the thinking you want to learn and then you need to engage in it repeatedly until it becomes automatically. Just as your body doesn't feel comfortable at first when you are learning to hit a ball, your brain doesn't feel comfortable at first with a new way of thinking. However, the more you engage the new thinking, the more comfortable you will become with it and the more you will believe it and be able to rely on it. The most difficult part of creating the new way of rational thinking for most people is the repetitive practice. Some people, however, may have difficulty with recognizing how their thinking is irrational. In which case they may need further assistance from a therapist. However, for everyone else, the process at this point is to develop methods of practice. The two main methods I recommend for my clients is listening to the Rational Thinking Improvement and/or Self-Esteem Improvement audio exercises and completing a daily cognitive diary. Rational Thinking Improvement Audio. This exercise is listening to an audio (download) that focuses on challenging a number of the commom errors in people's thinking including perfectionistic demand, fear of anxiety, catastrophic thinking, and social anxiety. The more you listen to this audio exercise, the more you will be able to think of it during the situations that typically cause irrational thinking for you. I've developed this audio as a way to make it easier for my clients to get the repetition they need to develop a new way of thinking. Self-Esteem Improvement Audio. The purpose of the this audio (download), as the name suggests, is to improve self-esteem. However, this exercise requires a little more than just listening to the audio. It requires you to know how to challenge your thinking because it just provides opportunities to challenge the thinking but doesn't tell you how to think like the above audio. For example, it has you imagine writing your negative self-talk on a blackboard, erasing it, and replacing it with positive self-talk, but it doesn't tell you exactly what to say. You need to create the self-talk yourself. Again, the more you use this audio, the more it helps you change your thinking. Cognitive Diary. The second primary method is to write down situations that disturb or distress us in the form of a cognitive diary. In a cognitive diary, not only do we describe the situation, but we write down in detail our self-talk. Then we review the self-talk and identify what is irrational about the self-talk. Finally, we re-write our self-talk in a more rational way and then remind ourselves of the new way as frequently as we can. We may do this by re-reading the cognitive challenges daily and/or even creating our own personalized audio reminders that we can listen to. Commitment to Change Irrational Thinking Our thinking is very changeable. However, we need to make the commitment to do the work. If you worked on changing your thinking everyday by reading, listening to the audio exercises, and completing a cognitive diary you will find your thinking changing even within a few weeks. This doesn't mean that everything is fine in that time but you can find yourself well on the way to improving your life. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Index--All Articles Index--PsychNotes Index--Audios Anxiety Cognitive Restructuring Conflict Resolution Depression Forgiveness General Happiness Jealousy Motivation and Goal-Setting Relationships Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy Sport Psychology Stress Weight Wellness Anxiety 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety--Index This series provides an explanation of some common coping statements. 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Describes 50 evidence-based tools from cognitive-behavioral therapy for coping with anxiety disorders. Understanding the Act As If Concept for Anxiety Treatment Discusses the exposure concept of act "as if" and how it differs from "fake it till you make it." Provides additional information about how to use the method effectively. How to Manage Panic and Anxiety Explains what panic is and is not, how it is maintained by the anxiety cycle, and some methods to learn how to control it. Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Discusses the methods involved in developing emotional mastery. What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy(MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Discusses the research regarding MCBT and what are realistic expectations for treatment. Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Social Phobia Discusses issues that occur in treatment when someone has both OCD and Social Phobia The Effectiveness of Cognitive Behavioral Treatment for Anxiety Disorders Describes research showing the effectiveness of CBT compared to medication. How to Interfere with Therapy When Your Loved One Has Anxiety or Depression Discusses how well-meaning family members can interfere with the progress of therapy. Coping with Change: Psychological Flexibility Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. Cognitive Restructuring How do we Change Irrational Thinking? Provides an overview of how cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) works. Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log The Mood Log feature of the app not only gives you a place to record your daily moods but it will provide an analysis of how different activities or events can impact your moods. What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Discusses expectations of MCBT and how to assess your efforts when practicing the methods. Does Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Lack Compassion? It Depends Upon the Therapist Discussion of a complaint made by some people regarding their experience with CBT and explains what to look for in a CBT therapist. 10 Common Errors Made In Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Discusses how to make CBT most effective by addressing common errors that occur. Coping With Change: Psychological Flexibility Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. The Effectiveness of Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for Anxiety Disorders Describes research showing the effectiveness of CBT compared to medication. Making Attributions for a Healthier Attitude Discusses how people tend to explain behavior and inaccuracies that can occur. Lies, Damned Lies, and Statistics Explains problems that occur in the popular media when sharing statistics regarding health issues. Rational Approach to the Holidays Holidays can be stressful for many people. This article discusses how changing thinking can reduce the stress. List of Cognitive Styles A list of the irrational beliefs used in Excel At Life's cognitive diary examples and apps. Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Examines catastrophic thinking which is the tendency to assume the worst-case scenario is likely to occur. Danger: Negativity Ahead Discusses the danger of engaging in negative thinking about the self, others, and situations. Use Your Head! And Your Heart! Describes emotional reasoning which is the tendency to believe emotions are accurate without evaluating them. Excellence vs. Perfection Compares perfectionistic thinking with striving for excellence. But It Happened Before! Generalizing is the irrational belief that because something occurred one time it is more likely to occur again. When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control Examines the Internal Control Fallacy of needing to be in control and responsible for everything and the External Control Fallacy which is believing everything that happens is due to luck or uncontrollable circumstances. Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Describes the different reasons people are mean on a continuum for unintentional to malicious. Read Books, Not Minds Discusses the irrational belief that others should know what you want or what you are feeling without telling them directly or that you know what others are thinking or feeling. To Should? Or, Not To Should? Demand Thinking Describes irrational thinking of shoulds or demands/expectations which are often perfectionistic or critical in nature. Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary Describes how to change irrational thinking styles by using the cognitive diary technique. The Worry Box Technique Describes how to reduce worry/anxiety by examining the importance of the worry and what can be done to manage the worry. Conflict Resolution How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Describes personality styles that are resistant to bullying and suggests ways to learn from these styles to manage and resist bullying. Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Recognize how passive-aggressive behavior can create problems in relationships and learn how to change it. What If You Considered Other Peoples' Views? Discusses the biases that interfere with listening and suggests methods for active listening. 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-Aggressive People Describes practical and effective ways of handling passive-aggressive behavior. When Needs Come Into Conflict A common source of conflict is when people have opposing, but valid, needs. What to Do When Anger Hurts Those You Love Explains how anger is reinforced biologically and how the CBT methods can help change the process. Conflict in the Workplace Discusses how to resolve problems at work. For Women Only: How to Have the Relationship of Your Dreams When women learn how to be more direct about their needs they can develop more satisfying relationships. Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Understanding the reasons for hurtful behavior can lead to greater resolution of problems in relationships. Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Discusses the normal grief process and how it impacts forgiveness. Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive Peopls The passive-aggressive style of communication can cause considerable problems in relationships. Co-Dependency: An Issue of Control Defines co-dependency and the problems that can occur in this unhealthy relationship style. When You Have Been Betrayed Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Depression Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment Questions you should be asked at a minimum prior to a diagnosis of depression and treatment. When Your Loved One Refuses Help Discusses ways to respond when your family member refuses mental health treatment. I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where do I Start? Provides some suggestions to help you get started with CBT. Depression is not Sadness Discusses the difference between clinical depression and the normal state of sadness. What is Depression? A Frequently Misunderstood Illness Identifies the different types of depression and how to understand the nature of depressive illness. What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy(MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Discusses the research regarding MCBT and what are realistic expectations for treatment. How to Interfere with Therapy When Your Loved One Has Anxiety or Depression Discusses how well-meaning family members can interfere with the progress of therapy. Forgiveness FORGIVENESS AND THE PROCESS OF HEALING Discusses healing from trauma as a process similar to walking a spiral staircase and gaining perspective with each level. STRUGGLING TO FORGIVE: AN INABILITY TO GRIEVE Discusses the normal grief process and how it impacts forgiveness. WHEN YOU HAVE BEEN BETRAYED Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. General 5 COMMON MICROAGGRESSIONS AGAINST THOSE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS Describes subtle discrimination against those who have mental illness. Happiness THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS: LET IT FIND YOU (BUT MAKE THE EFFORT) Discusses the concept of happiness and the common obstacles to achieving happiness. Reviews the methods on how to reduce the obstacles to happiness. HAPPY HABITS: 50 SUGGESTIONS A description of 50 different suggestions that can help create opportunities for happiness. HAPPINESS IS AN ATTITUDE Discusses how thinking, not events, influence overall happiness. SADNESS IS A STATE OF HAPPINESS Explains how all emotions are an important part of happiness. Jealousy WHEN IS JEALOUSY IRRATIONAL? Describes how to identify irrational jealousy and how it impacts relationships. WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR JEALOUSY THREATENS TO DESTROY YOUR MARRIAGE Describes the destructiveness of irrational jealousy and how make changes. WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR PARTNER'S JEALOUSY THREATENS TO DESTROY YOUR RELATIONSHIP Discusses how to respond to a partner's irrational jealousy. REJECTION SENSITIVITY, IRRATIONAL JEALOUSY, & IMPACT ON RELATIONSHIPS Examines the fear of rejection, its relation to irrational jealousy, and how it negatively affects relationships. JEALOUSY: WHEN THE DAMAGE IS DONE Discusses what to do when the irrational jealousy has already seriously harmed the relationship. WHEN YOU HAVE BEEN BETRAYED Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Motivation and Goal-Setting GUIDE TO HOW TO SET ACHIEVABLE GOALS Describes steps to help set realistic goals and how to follow through. SETTING GOALS TO MAXIMIZE PERFORMANCE Discusses how to set athletic goals to achieve maximum performance. MOTIVATION: INTRINSIC VS. EXTRINSIC How to develop internal motivation based upon your own goals. EXCELLENCE VS. PERFECTION Striving for excellence involves setting realistic, achievable goals rather than perfectionistic demands. FEEDBACK, SELF-EFFICACY, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOTOR SKILLS How to teach to increase internal motivation for developing physical skills. GIVING WOMEN FEEDBACK TO INCREASE SELF-EFFICACY Improving self-efficacy increases internal motivation. Relationships 7 RULES AND 8 METHODS FOR RESPONDING TO PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE PEOPLE Describes practical and effective ways of handling passive-aggressive behavior. WHAT TO DO WHEN ANGER HURTS THOSE YOU LOVE Explains how anger is reinforced biologically and how the CBT methods can help change the process. FOR WOMEN ONLY: HOW TO HAVE THE RELATIONSHIP OF YOUR DREAMS When women learn how to be more direct about their needs they can develop more satisfying relationships. CRAZY-MAKERS: PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE PEOPLE The passive-aggressive style of communication can cause considerable problems in relationships. CO-DEPENDENCY: AN ISSUE OF CONTROL Defines co-dependency and the problems that can occur in this unhealthy relationship style. BREAKING UP IS HARD TO DO: ENDING A BAD RELATIONSHIP Discusses two common problems when ending bad relationships: returning repeatedly to the relationship and failure to learn from the mistake. REJECTION SENSITIVITY, IRRATIONAL JEALOUSY, & IMPACT ON RELATIONSHIPS Examines the fear of rejection, its relation to irrational jealousy, and how it negatively affects relationships. Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy 20 STEPS TO BETTER SELF-ESTEEM Provides the how-to steps to improving self-esteem. THE PILLARS OF THE SELF-CONCEPT: SELF-ESTEEM AND SELF-EFFICACY Discusses the different but similar concepts of self-esteem and self-efficacy. FEEDBACK, SELF-EFFICACY, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOTOR SKILLS How to teach to increase internal motivation for developing physical skills. GIVING WOMEN FEEDBACK TO INCREASE SELF-EFFICACY Improving self-efficacy increases internal motivation. MAKING MISTAKES TO ENHANCE SELF-ESTEEM AND IMPROVE PERFORMANCE Thinking of mistakes in a different way can lead to greater success. SELF-EFFICACY: THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN SPORTS Defines self-efficacy and how it impacts performance in sports. EXERCISE AND THE SELF-ESTEEM CYCLE Describes how self-esteem influences exercise tendencies and how exercise improves self-esteem. Sport Psychology WHAT IS SPORT PSYCHOLOGY? Defines sport psychology. EFFECTS OF INTENSITY ON PERFORMANCE Understanding the concept of intensity can improve athletic performance. PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT IN THE MARTIAL ARTS: A REVIEW Reviews the sport psychology research regarding improving performance in martial arts. Also, applies to other sports. EFFECTS OF INTENSITY ON PERFORMANCE Discusses the concept of an optimal level of intensity for best performance. WHEN ANXIETY INTERFERES WITH PERFORMANCE: TRANSFERING PRACTICE Discusses how to transfer practice skills to real-life situations. ASSESSING AND COPING WITH INJURIES Discusses how to psychologically cope with injuries. SETTING GOALS TO MAXIMIZE PERFORMANCE Discusses how to set athletic goals to achieve maximum performance. FEEDBACK, SELF-EFFICACY, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOTOR SKILLS How to teach to increase internal motivation for developing physical skills. GIVING WOMEN FEEDBACK TO INCREASE SELF-EFFICACY Improving self-efficacy increases internal motivation. SELF-EFFICACY: THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN SPORTS Defines self-efficacy and how it impacts performance in sports. CHALLENGING PERFECTIONISTIC DEMANDS Discusses how perfectionistic expectations can interfere with martial arts performance. EXERCISE AND THE SELF-ESTEEM CYCLE Describes how self-esteem influences exercise tendencies and how exercise improves self-esteem. TEACHING SELF-CORRECTION Discusses the importance of self-correction for athletes and how to teach self-correction. ISSUES WHEN ENDING A SPORTS CAREER Athletes often have difficulty when ending careers due to not recognizing the losses involved. PERSONALITY TESTING IN SPORTS: SHOULD WE OR SHOULDN'T WE? Examines the role of personality testing in sports. DEVELOPING FOCUS Discusses the importance of focus in martial arts training and how to improve focus. GOAL-SETTING FOR A SPORTS TEAM Discusses why the development of specific goals is important for success in sports. SELF-EFFICACY: THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN SPORTS Explains the concept of self-efficacy and how it impacts athletic success. TEACHING SELF-CORRECTION Explains the concept of self-correction and how to enhance an athlete's ability to correct mistakes. Stress A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help Explains the biology of the stress reaction and how cognitive-behavioral therapy impacts that process at the biological level. Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Discusses the methods involved in developing emotional mastery. Stress: 50 Suggestions Describes 50 methods to help reduce or cope with life stress. Too Stressed to Relax? Managing stress improves psychological and physical health. Weight THINKING YOUR WAY TO A HEALTHY WEIGHT Examines the thinking that interferes with weight loss. MY CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIE DIET: OR, HOW TO LOSE WEIGHT WITHOUT DEPRIVATION Using cognitive-behavioral methods to lose weight. Wellness A BRIEF PRIMER ON THE BIOLOGY OF STRESS AND HOW CBT CAN HELP Explains the biology of the stress reaction and how cognitive-behavioral therapy impacts that process at the biological level. THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS: LET IT FIND YOU (BUT MAKE THE EFFORT) Discusses the concept of happiness and the common obstacles to achieving happiness. Reviews the methods on how to reduce the obstacles to happiness. WHY ARE MEDITATIVE RELAXATION AND MINDFULNESS IMPORTANT? Discusses the relaxation and different methods. Good introduction before using relaxation and mindfulness audios. THINKING YOUR WAY TO A HEALTHY WEIGHT Examines the thinking that interferes with weight loss. TOO STRESSED TO RELAX? Managing stress improves psychological and physical health. MOBILIZING YOUR BODY'S RESOURCES: HEALING FROM ILLNESS OR INJURY Discusses the natural methods of healing. MY CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIE DIET: OR, HOW TO LOSE WEIGHT WITHOUT DEPRIVATION Using cognitive-behavioral methods to lose weight. WELLNESS: HOW TO REDUCE ILLNESS AND ITS EFFECTS Discusses behavioral ways to manage illness and improve health. POWER OF THE MIND: THE WELLNESS PHILOSOPHY Discusses how the mind can impact health and well-being. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Goal Setting For a Sports Team by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "One area in which sport psychology can be helpful to both individuals and teams is assisting with the development of goals." Tweet A young soccer player accompanied by his father reluctantly walked into my office because he had problems with "motivation" according to his father. The boy sat quietly while his father explained, "He just doesn't seem to care. He's good enough to get a scholarship to college but he's not making the effort. I tell him all the time how he can improve his game but I never see any effort." When I asked about the coach's involvement the father responded, "He's just useless. He thinks the most important thing is for the kids to have fun. He encourages them but he never tells them specifics about how to improve. I think I need to switch him to another team where the coach focuses more on winning games." When I talked to the boy alone I found out that he really enjoyed soccer but felt that he couldn't meet his father's demands. He also felt that he didn't get much direction from his coach. As a result, he didn't have clear ideas about how to improve his skills. The above situation describes three different sets of goals that were developed without any communication among the people involved. His father's goals were outcome or success-oriented goals focused on winning games or "winning" a scholarship. The coach's goals weren't focused on the skills at all but on the emotional aspect of enjoying the sport. The boy wanted to improve specific skills but needed assistance to develop performance-oriented goals. However, due to his father's expectations he tended to be fearful of failure; this failure-orientation in his goals tended to decrease motivation and persistence. The practice of sport psychology can often seem fairly vague and undefined to the public. Describing particular applications of sport psychology allows for a clearer picture of what sport psychologists do. One area in which sport psychology can be helpful to both individuals and teams is assisting with the development of goals. The following will describe how a sport psychologist may work with a team and team members to create goals to enhance overall performance of the team. A sport psychologist needs to first enlist the support of the coach and to prepare the coach as to how best to assist the athletes with their goals. This conversation can involve a discussion of how players attributions affect their performance and how the coach can affect those attributions both positively and negatively by how feedback is given to the individual and the team. In addition, this discussion may involve how the coach can be supportive of the players achieving their goals. The next step would be to meet with the team and get team support for the goal setting process by discussing the benefits of goal setting. These benefits include directing attention to a particular skill, improving the quality of practice, assuring that the athlete knows what is expected, motivating and relieving boredom, and increasing self-confidence. The psychologist should also discuss the importance of attributions, how they affect self-efficacy and performance, and how to develop an effective attributional style. In particular, the difference between performance-oriented goals which are directed towards achieving individual skills or behaviors and outcome-oriented goals which are directed towards winning should be delineated. A goal focused on a performance-orientation tends to be more effective because it is more under the control of the athlete, involves learning even at the risk of making mistakes, improves problem-solving, and encourages the athlete to be more persistent with higher effort. The performance-oriented athlete does not perceive failure but just opportunities to learn and improve. The outcome-oriented goals can either be focused on achieving success or avoiding failure. An athlete with the success-oriented style will tend to strive to do only well enough to win while trying to avoid the risk of error which will affect future learning and affect the ability to reach the greatest potential; however, the athlete will tend to persist and problem-solve in the face of failure. The failure-oriented athlete who sees success as luck and failure as lack of ability will typically be the least successful of these different types because failure will tend to decrease persistence and problem-solving, thereby decreasing overall performance. In addition to the above, the psychologist can describe to the team the basic tenets of goal setting. These tenets involve setting specific measurable goals, setting challenging but realistic goals, setting practice as well as competitive goals, making sure the goals are framed positively, setting target dates to keep focused, recording goals and making a public commitment, and setting both short-term and long-term goals. Once the team members understand the concepts of goal setting, the psychologist can meet individually with the athletes to develop personal goals. With the individual athlete the psychologist can assist with choosing one or two specific goals, setting target dates by using the stair-step method of breaking the goal into smaller segments, developing the specific strategies of achieving the goals, and developing rewards for achieving the goals. In developing specific strategies and setting target dates, it is important that the athlete understand that goals take longer to affect more complex tasks. In addition, both long-term goals and short-term goals are important because the long-term goals provide direction whereas the short-term goals are most effective for change. Therefore, a psychologist working with a volleyball team will help team members develop different specific goals. One athlete may want to develop greater jumping height whereas another may want to develop greater accuracy with serving. Both of these goals are measurable: jumping height by measuring inches of a vertical jump and serving accuracy by measure inches from a target. A starting point can be determined by assessing the current ability and then target dates are chosen by identifying reasonable changes that can be achieved. The coachs previous experience can also be valuable in determining these parameters. The athlete will also develop strategies to achieve the goal. For instance, to improve jumping height, the athlete can work on developing leg strength through weight training and plyometric training. The psychologist can then meet with the entire team and the coach to develop specific team goals and strategies in the same manner. For example, the team may develop a specific practice goal of improving team cooperation as measured by number of assists with the ball. Again, the team will develop strategies to achieve this goal such as practicing passing the ball. Also, the team can determine appropriate methods of providing feedback and getting support and encouragement from the coach and other team members. Finally, the psychologist should periodically review the goals with the individuals and the team members. This step is crucial to assure that the athletes maintain their focus on the goals as well as to adjust goals as needed. This also allows the psychologist to check with the athletes regarding whether the support methods and reward system are helping. Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Loving Kindness Meditation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Loving Kindness Meditation with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Loving Kindness Meditation Audio meditation using the Buddhist psychology method of Loving Kindness. This method helps you to develop a more positive attitude towards others and towards all things. The positive attitude developed with the use of this meditation will help you to feel better about yourself as well. Although Buddhist psychology uses the meditations from Buddhism, these meditations are not a religious practice but a way of approaching life that creates greater inner peace and contentment. When you listen to a meditation, don't try to force the feelings but just allow yourself to experience it. If other thoughts distract you, just allow yourself to refocus very gently back to the meditation. Over time you will find yourself more able to focus and experience it to greater levels. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Voice only version With music version Transcript: Loving Kindness Meditation This meditation comes from the Buddhist practice of loving kindness which is to focus positive thoughts towards others. It can be used as a daily meditation. It is particularly helpful if you tend to have negative thoughts or reactions to others. You may begin by focusing mindfully on your breath. Notice each breath as you inhale.....and exhale. Focus on the experience of each breath....how it feels as you bring air into your body...how the muscles in your chest and abdomen expand...the sound of the breath...even the temperature of the air as you inhale. Notice the feel of each breath as you exhale...how your muscles release and relax...what the air feels like as it leaves your body. Now, as you continue this gentle, mindful breathing, think of someone close to you, someone for whom you generally have strong positive feelings. Picture this person in your mind. As you continue your breathing, think of this person and wish this person the following three times: May you be safe. May you be healthy. May you be happy. May you be at peace. Now, continuing to breath mindfully, think of a friend or family member. Picture this person in your mind. As you continue your breathing, think of this person and wish this person the following: May you be safe. May you be healthy. May you be happy. May you be at peace. As you continue your gentle, mindful breathing, think of an acquaintance or a strangermaybe someone you have only encountered in passing. Picture this person in your mind. As you continue your breathing, think of this person and wish this person the following: May you be safe. May you be healthy. May you be happy. May you be at peace. Now, as you continue your mindful breathing, think of yourself. Picture yourself in your mind. As you breath gently and quietly, wish yourself the following: May I be safe. May I be healthy. May I be at happy. May I be at peace. Continuing to breath quietly and mindfully, think of an adversarysomeone for whom you have strong negative feelings or reactions. This may be a person with whom you have had long-standing problems or someone you just briefly encountered. Picture this person in your mind. As you continue your breathing, think of this person and wish this person the following: May you be safe. May you be healthy. May you be happy. May you be at peace. As you continue your mindful breathing, think of a group of people. This may be a group associated with positive feelings or with negative feelings, whatever you choose. Picture this group in your mind. As you continue your breathing, think of this group and wish them the following: May they be safe. May they be healthy. May they be happy. May they be at peace. Continuing to breath gently and mindfully, think of the entire world...all people. Allow yourself to picture all people and all things...you may have mixed feelings. Just allow yourself to continue your breathing, think of all people everywhere and everything in the entire world and wish them the following: May they be safe. May they be healthy. May they be happy. May they be at peace. Whenever you are ready, you may very gently come back to full awareness, open your eyes and carry these feelings with you throughout the day. Copyright 2012 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Anxiety Articles 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety--Index This series provides an explanation of some common coping statements. 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Describes 50 evidence-based tools from cognitive-behavioral therapy for coping with anxiety disorders. Understanding the Act As If Concept for Anxiety Treatment Discusses the exposure concept of act "as if" and how it differs from "fake it till you make it." Provides additional information about how to use the method effectively. How to Manage Panic and Anxiety Explains what panic is and is not, how it is maintained by the anxiety cycle, and some methods to learn how to control it. Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Discusses the methods involved in developing emotional mastery. What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy(MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Discusses the research regarding MCBT and what are realistic expectations for treatment. Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Social Phobia Discusses issues that occur in treatment when someone has both OCD and Social Phobia The Effectiveness of Cognitive Behavioral Treatment for Anxiety Disorders Describes research showing the effectiveness of CBT compared to medication. How to Interfere with Therapy When Your Loved One Has Anxiety or Depression Discusses how well-meaning family members can interfere with the progress of therapy. Coping with Change: Psychological Flexibility Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help Explains the biology of the stress reaction and how cognitive-behavioral therapy impacts that process at the biological level. How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? Provides an overview of how cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) works. Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Examines catastrophic thinking which is the tendency to assume the worst-case scenario is likely to occur. Anxiety PsychNotes Why Relabeling Anxiety as Excitement Doesn't Work Anxiety and Poor Memory: It's Really About Attention Developing Tolerance of Anxiety Perception of Family Criticism Impedes Recovery from Panic Disorder It's Not as Simple as Being Grateful Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Do You Worry When Waiting for Medical Test Results? Reduce Worry By Thinking About It? Being Too Aware of Your Body Can Lead to General Worrying Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? Listening to the Message of Anxiety Be Sure to Sleep After Exposure Treatment Treatment for Long-term Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) May Differ from Short-Term GAD The Difference Between Normal Worry and Generalized Anxiety Disorder Anxiety Disorders May Not Be As Prevalent As We Thought Best Predictor of Treatment Outcome for Anxiety Disorders How Effective is CBT for Children With Anxiety Disorders? Listening to Your Heart Helps Moral Decision-Making: But is it Good for Fear Avoidance Decisions? An Anxiety Disorder is Not Weakness! Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present Anxiety and the Avoidance of Positive Emotions Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Effects of Introversion When a Person has Panic Disorder CBT Reduces Anxiety During Breast Cancer Treatment Afraid of Feeling Good? Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Listen Free to Stress Reduction Audios Autogenic Relaxation Training Mindful Breathing Muscle Scan Progressive Muscle Relaxation Tense and Release Stretching Autogenic Relaxation Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mindful Breathing If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Muscle Scan If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Progressive Muscle Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Progressive Muscle Relaxation with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Tense and Release If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Stretching If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Autogenic Relaxation Training This audio teaches autogenic relaxation which is a focus on the pleasant sensations of warmth and heaviness coming into your body. Practicing this method will help you become more skilled at being aware of your body, where you feel tension, and replacing the tension with pleasant warmth and soothing heaviness. About 9 minutes. When doing any mindful or relaxation exercise, it is important to very gently bring your focus back to your experience if distracting thoughts occur. Do not try to get rid of the thoughts because that interferes with the relaxation process. Instead, just gently refocus back to the exercise. Once you have learned this technique, you can use it to help whenever you feel stressed. You won't need to listen to the entire audio but will be able to focus on the sensations of your body, being aware of the tension, and releasing the tension by replacing with the relaxing sensations of warmth and heaviness. Listen Mindful Breathing This audio is a quick three minute stress management technique that coaches you through mindful breathing. Mindfulness is a state of mind in which you focus completely on your most immediate experience. In this exercise, the focus is on the full experience of your breathing. When doing any mindful exercise, it is important to very gently bring your focus back to your experience if distracting thoughts occur. Do not try to get rid of the thoughts because that interferes with mindfulness. Instead, just gently refocus back to the exercise. Once you have learned this technique, you can use it to help with sleep when you are having trouble quieting your mind. Focus on the mindful breathing. Whenever any thoughts occur, gently bring your focus back to your breath. You may have to do this a number of times before your mind quiets. Once you are fully focused on your each breath, you are more likely to drift naturally off to sleep. Listen Muscle Scan This audio is a quick two minute muscle scan to help you be aware of where you are feeling muscle tension. As you become aware of tension, you can then focus on letting those muscles relax. Too often when people are feeling muscle tension they don't take the time to be aware of their experience so the tension is not addressed. You can use this exercise throughout your day to relieve your muscle tension. The more you use it, the more bodily awareness you will develop and will more naturally relax your muscles. Listen Progressive Muscle Relaxation This audio is a deep relaxation method focusing on tensing and releasing each muscle group to become more aware of the muscle tension and reducing it. Too often when people are feeling muscle tension they don't take the time to be aware of their experience so the tension is not addressed. Using this audio can teach you more about relaxing your muscles so that you can use the technique whenever you feel muscle tension. The more you use it, the more bodily awareness you will develop and will more naturally relax your muscles. Voice only version With music version Tense and Release This audio is a very quick muscle relief exercise. All you do is tense all your muscles until they are very tight and then suddenly just release all the tension with a sigh. Then allow yourself to feel the relaxation flowing into your body and relaxing your muscles. You can use this exercise throughout your day to relieve your muscle tension. Listen Stretching This audio is a quick two minute stretching exercise to increase blood flow throughout your body. As the blood flow increases you will experience tension release in the muscles and overall body relaxation. You can use this exercise throughout your day to increase your relaxation and reduce the effects of stress on your body. Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Rational Thinking Improvement If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Rational Thinking Improvement Audio rational thinking exercise focused on reducing anxiety and perfectionistic or demand thinking by changing self-talk. The idea of this exercise is to listen to it frequently so as to increase the repetition of rational self-talk. The more you listen to it, the more you will start to use the thinking presented. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise does not need complete relaxation in order to benefit. You may find that you can listen to it while taking a walk or doing dishes or some other activity that doesn't require your complete focus. Do not use while operating a car! Listen HOW DO WE CHANGE IRRATIONAL THINKING? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Our thinking is very changeable. If you worked on changing your thinking everyday by reading, listening to the audio exercises, and completing a cognitive diary you will find your thinking changing even within a few weeks." As you may realize as you read the articles on this site, the underlying core issue for many problems resides with irrational thinking styles. That, of course, is the basic premise of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). We develop styles of thinking based upon our learning experiences, our parents' thinking, and societal/community beliefs and expectations. Learning Experiences. When we are growing up, we have many experiences and the outcome of these experiences contribute to beliefs or ways of thinking that we develop. For instance, as a child I was very shy and fearful of speaking in public due to fear of making a mistake and being ridiculed. In the 7th grade I had a teacher who encouraged me to attend speech competitions. I was so excited that she thought I could be good at this that I was willing to face my fear and engage in speech competitions which I continued even throughout high school. As a result, I developed the belief "Even though talking in front of people causes anxiety I am capable of doing it." Now, if I had not had that experience and my main experience was being embarrassed in front of my class because I couldn't say the word "peculiar" when I was reading out loud (it sounds different than it looks and I couldn't get my brain to switch from the visual to the auditory because I was so anxious), I may have developed the belief "Talking in front of people leads to embarrassment which I must avoid." The problem that causes this belief to be irrational is that it is black and white--it leaves no room for alternatives. I would be assuming that talking in front of people always leads to embarrassment. Instead, by doing speech competitions I learned that talking in front of people could be enjoyable and could lead to awards. Trauma is an important subset of learning experiences that severely affects an individual's belief system. For example, an individual who survived a fire has a fear of low probability catastrophes. Due to the fact that a low probability catastrophe occurred to him or her, it is more difficult to challenge the thinking with a statement such as "It is unlikely to occur." Or a person who was raped and then told it was her fault because she left her door unlocked may tend to unreasonably blame herself for things that happen. Parents' Thinking. Sometimes our parents teach us irrational thinking directly such as "What would the neighbors think?" if they saw a dirty house implying that the neighbors would think we are bad people because the dishes aren't done and the beds aren't made. They may catastrophize about situations and pass their worries onto us "I don't want to fly because the airplane might crash." Often, they don't recognize that their thinking is irrational and so they don't tell us there might be alternative ways to think. For instance, they don't typically say "I have an irrational fear of crashing but airplance travel is actually the safest form of travel. Even if our parents don't directly tell us how to think, they impart certain ways of thinking based on their behavior and how they handle situations. For instance, I remember my father speeding past a bunch of cars and then coming to a stoplight which caused all the cars he had passed to catch up with him and he slammed his hand on the steering wheel and said "They're all laughing at me." At first I was confused, but then I came to understand what he meant and that others laughing at him was a catastrophe. From this I came to learn that I had to be careful in how I behaved so that people wouldn't have the opportunity to laugh at me. Societal/Community Beliefs and Expectations. We learn a great deal of thinking based on the culture we grow up in. For instance, a professor of mine once described his experience as a teacher in the Virgin Islands. He said they did not have the same concept of time that we do in the U.S. College students in the U.S. typically arrive to class on time but as soon as the class is over they are out the door even if the instructor is in mid-sentence. However, in the Virgin Islands college students might arrive 20-30 minutes late but they also tended to stay longer and be involved in discussions after class. Neither of these scenarios are right or wrong, they are just different behaviors based upon cultural influences. However, sometimes those societal beliefs and expectations can lead to problematic behaviors. Here in the U.S. the perfectionistic tendencies that are imparted to us as we grow up can lead to being overwhelmed and not trying. I believe much of our problem as a society with obesity can be related to these attitudes: "I can't make myself stay on a diet and exercise daily, so why should I bother trying?" (see Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight) Cognitive Restructuring Therefore, due to these various influences we develop our thinking styles, both rational and irrational. You may already recognize some of your irrational thinking styles and how they developed, but you want to know, "How do I change this thinking?" In fact, many times you've probably have had people tell you "Think this way!" But no one tells you how to "Think this way!" So, you still have the question, "How do I think that way?" The answer is that you are already halfway there. Half of the battle is recognizing the thinking that is problematic for you. You can do this by reading other articles on this site as well as the recommended books. The next step however, is the part that requires more active work and that is challenging the thinking, repeatedly and often. This part of therapy is known as "cognitive restructuring." To learn any new skill, we first have to identify how to complete the skill correctly and then we have to practice the skill repeatedly. So, for instance, if you want to learn how to hit a ball with a bat, you need to learn how to hold the bat and how to stand and when to swing. But, just because you know intellectually how to hit a ball doesn't mean that you will be able to. The next step is to practice swinging the bat at the ball and adjusting your stance until you can hit the ball. However, even then it doesn't mean that you can automatically hit the ball whenever it is thrown to you. At this point you need to practice swinging the bat at the ball again and again until you develop the muscle memory to do it automatically. That way, when you are under the stress of two outs in the ninth inning, you will be able to automatically engage in the behavior you need to hit the ball. Well, learning a new way of thinking is learning a new thinking skill and the process is the same as learning to hit a ball with a bat. You need to identify the thinking you want to learn and then you need to engage in it repeatedly until it becomes automatically. Just as your body doesn't feel comfortable at first when you are learning to hit a ball, your brain doesn't feel comfortable at first with a new way of thinking. However, the more you engage the new thinking, the more comfortable you will become with it and the more you will believe it and be able to rely on it. The most difficult part of creating the new way of rational thinking for most people is the repetitive practice. Some people, however, may have difficulty with recognizing how their thinking is irrational. In which case they may need further assistance from a therapist. However, for everyone else, the process at this point is to develop methods of practice. The two main methods I recommend for my clients is listening to the Rational Thinking Improvement and/or Self-Esteem Improvement audio exercises and completing a daily cognitive diary. Rational Thinking Improvement Audio. This exercise is listening to an audio (download) that focuses on challenging a number of the commom errors in people's thinking including perfectionistic demand, fear of anxiety, catastrophic thinking, and social anxiety. The more you listen to this audio exercise, the more you will be able to think of it during the situations that typically cause irrational thinking for you. I've developed this audio as a way to make it easier for my clients to get the repetition they need to develop a new way of thinking. Self-Esteem Improvement Audio. The purpose of the this audio (download), as the name suggests, is to improve self-esteem. However, this exercise requires a little more than just listening to the audio. It requires you to know how to challenge your thinking because it just provides opportunities to challenge the thinking but doesn't tell you how to think like the above audio. For example, it has you imagine writing your negative self-talk on a blackboard, erasing it, and replacing it with positive self-talk, but it doesn't tell you exactly what to say. You need to create the self-talk yourself. Again, the more you use this audio, the more it helps you change your thinking. Cognitive Diary. The second primary method is to write down situations that disturb or distress us in the form of a cognitive diary. In a cognitive diary, not only do we describe the situation, but we write down in detail our self-talk. Then we review the self-talk and identify what is irrational about the self-talk. Finally, we re-write our self-talk in a more rational way and then remind ourselves of the new way as frequently as we can. We may do this by re-reading the cognitive challenges daily and/or even creating our own personalized audio reminders that we can listen to. Commitment to Change Irrational Thinking Our thinking is very changeable. However, we need to make the commitment to do the work. If you worked on changing your thinking everyday by reading, listening to the audio exercises, and completing a cognitive diary you will find your thinking changing even within a few weeks. This doesn't mean that everything is fine in that time but you can find yourself well on the way to improving your life. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Are You a Leader? The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses personality characteristics that are related to leadership qualities including tendency to lead, to be assertive and goal-oriented, and ability to cooperate. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: Uncertainty, Decision-making, and Stress An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? The Value of Each and Every Life and How Perfectionism Destroys that Value Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? More questionnaires: List of PsychTests Your Happiness Assessment Cognitive Styles Test Self-Esteem Self-Efficacy How Social Are You? For authors and more information: Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R., & Gough, H. C. (2006). The International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84-96. International Personality Item Pool: A Scientific Collaboratory for the Development of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences (http://ipip.ori.org/). Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles GAD-7: Generalized Anxiety Disorder The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire measures anxiety to help assess whether an anxiety disorder, particularly Generalized Anxiety Disorder, may be present. The GAD-7 is only a screening tool, not a diagnostic instrument. For a full evaluation, see a professional. Take test No login required to obtain results Spitzer,R.L, Kroenke, K., Williams, J.B., and Lwe B. (2006). A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: the GAD-7. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1092-7. Related reading: 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety More questionnaires: Willoughy Social Anxiety Scale List of PsychTests Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles PsychNotes Index Aging and Lifespan Issues Anger, Conflict, and Forgiveness Anxiety Childhood Issues Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Communication Depression Emotions Fitness and Health Happiness and Well-being Mental Abilities and Memory Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Pain Management Parenting Perfectionism Performance, Success and Goal Attainment Personality Physical Health Policies and Issues in Mental Health Relationships Rejection Sensitivity Self-esteem and Self-efficacy Sleep Disturbance Social Anxiety Social Media and Internet Stress and Coping Trauma and PTSD Weight Control and Body Image Work and Productivity Also, see: Index for articles Index for Rules of Life Index for audios Index for Cognitive Diary Training Examples Aging and Lifespan Issues Do Not Go Gentle: Mental Decline and Aging The Stress Hormone and Mental Abilities in Older Adults Brain Training and Age-related Decline of Driving Skills The Truth About Aging and Dieting I'm Old, Not Stupid! Patronizing Speech and the Elderly Older, But Happier What Do You Believe About Growing Old? Want to Live a Long and Happy Life? Getting Better With Age: Improved Well-being Fountain of Youth: Exercise Slows Mental Decline Anger, Conflict, and Forgiveness Why People Blame Others Be Careful Accusing Someone of Lying Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair How Moral Identity Influences Witnesses' Reactions to Abusive Supervisors Conflict Resolution: What if You Considered Other People's Views? Blame as a Way of Feeling in Control Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Making an Assertive Complaint Forgiveness Isn't Always a Virtue When to Criticize Your Partner Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present Laugh in the Face of Adversity: Reducing Stress During Marital Conflict Time Plus Value: Equation for Forgiveness? Is Rage Worth the Physical Suffering? Marital Conflict: When Bad is Good and When It's Bad Anxiety Why Relabeling Anxiety as Excitement Doesn't Work Anxiety and Poor Memory: It's Really About Attention Developing Tolerance of Anxiety Perception of Family Criticism Impedes Recovery from Panic Disorder It's Not as Simple as Being Grateful Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Do You Worry When Waiting for Medical Test Results? Reduce Worry By Thinking About It? Being Too Aware of Your Body Can Lead to General Worrying Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? Listening to the Message of Anxiety Be Sure to Sleep After Exposure Treatment Treatment for Long-term Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) May Differ from Short-Term GAD The Difference Between Normal Worry and Generalized Anxiety Disorder Anxiety Disorders May Not Be As Prevalent As We Thought Best Predictor of Treatment Outcome for Anxiety Disorders How Effective is CBT for Children With Anxiety Disorders? Listening to Your Heart Helps Moral Decision-Making: But is it Good for Fear Avoidance Decisions? An Anxiety Disorder is Not Weakness! Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present Anxiety and the Avoidance of Positive Emotions Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Effects of Introversion When a Person has Panic Disorder CBT Reduces Anxiety During Breast Cancer Treatment Afraid of Feeling Good? Childhood Issues Exposure Treatment of Simple Phobias in Children Encouraging Task Persistence to Help Children Achieve in Life Will-power or Strategy? Most Kids Ignore Cyber-Bullying Understanding Asperger's Syndrome, Grief, and Avoidance of Loss How We Might Stop Bullying: Kindness Curriculum for Preschoolers Aggressive Children Can Learn Control How Playing Violent Video Games Affects Your Children Medication and ADHD: What's Wrong With These Numbers? How Effective is CBT for Children With Anxiety Disorders? Are U.S. Children Over-medicated With Stimulants? "Common Sense" Approach to Praise Can Worsen Self-esteem in Vulnerable Children Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present ADHD: A Problem With Restraint? Exercise Can Help Adolescents With Depression Violent Video Games Cause Aggression Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Measuring Progress Creates Progress To Effectively Use the Cognitive Diary Limit Your Evaluation When You have Negative Thoughts about Your Thoughts Don't Assume You Know What Others Are Thinking and Feeling Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? Blaming as a Way of Feeling in Control How Does Cognitive Therapy Help Depression? Why You Need to Write to Challenge Thinking Be Sure to Sleep After Exposure Treatment Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem This Is Your Brain on Change Treatment Resistant Depression isn't Resistant to Cognitive Therapy Did You Know Psychotherapy Has Stronger Scientific Evidence Than Many Common Medical Procedures? Binge Eating: CBT vs. Medication Why CBT Instead of Medication? Problem with Depression and CBT: It Can Be OverWhelming How Effective is CBT for Children With Anxiety Disorders? Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! CBT Reduces Anxiety During Breast Cancer Treatment CBT vs. Medication for Depression Effectiveness of Online Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Communication Assertion 101: Remain Calm In Praise of Specific Praise Be Careful Accusing Someone of Lying Assertion 101: The Importance of Eye Contact Steps to Reduce Holiday Stress When Encountering Family Demands Assertion 101: You Have the Right to Say I Don't Care People-pleasing 101 When Emotional Reasoning Interferes With Having a Dialog About Micro-aggressions Handling Passive-Aggressive Emoticons Assertion 101: Don't Apologize for a Request Assertion 101: Just Say No Do You Understand Me? Conflict in Relationships When Doctors Don't Listen Is Your Boss Unfair? What You Can Do About It I've Been There Doesn't Always Mean I Support You Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Making an Assertive Complaint When to Criticize Your Partner Marital Conflict: When Bad is Good and When It's Bad Depression Is Diet a Cause or Consequence of Depression? And How is Impulsiveness Related? When You Love Someone With Depression Something Good About Depression? Why People with Depression Avoid Positive Experiences: or, It's Impossible to Pull Yourself Up by Your Bootstraps On the Importance of Healthy Eating When Severely Depressed Persistence, Zest for Life, and Mindfulness It's Not as Simple as Being Grateful Gut Bacteria, Auto-immune Diseases, and Depression Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants Antidepressants Do Little for Mild to Moderate Depression Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong How Does Cognitive Therapy Help Depression? Treatment Resistant Depression isn't Resistant to Cognitive Therapy Does Sadness Cause Depression? Qigong Can Reduce Depression Problem with Depression and CBT: It Can Be OverWhelming Stomach Bacteria and Depression? Really? Moody? Maybe It's Your Stomach Bacteria Can Pop Culture Make You Depressed? Harnessing Happiness When You Have Depression Does Trauma Cause Depression? Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Grief is Not Depression Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood CBT vs. Medication for Depression Exercise Can Help Adolescents With Depression Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Emotions Don't Accept Criticism Without Evaluating the Source Borderline Personality Disorder and Lack of Confidence When Interpreting Emotions Compassion: Selflessness With a Selfish Purpose Snap Judgments of People as Creepy May Harm You Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Do You Have Too Much Empathy? Difference Between Dealing With Emotions and Being Stuck in Negative Emotions It's Just Words Irrational: Is it the Word or the Intention that is Offensive? When Emotional Reasoning Interferes With Having a Dialog About Micro-aggressions Gratitude Associated With Self-control Developing Emotional Tolerance When You are Distressed: Write! Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Understanding Asperger's Syndrome, Grief, and Avoidance of Loss When to Forgive Yourself: Self-forgiveness and Responsibility Importance of Guilt vs. Irrational Guilt The Costs of Get Over It Empathy Requires a Strong Sense of Self Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Love Enhances Men's Ability to Recognize Emotion Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder Addiction to Emotions and Mindfulness Practice Does Sadness Cause Depression? Acceptance as the Basis for Wisdom? Drug Companies to Profit From Grief? An Opinion I want to feel good NOW! Moody? Maybe It's Your Stomach Bacteria Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! Anxiety and the Avoidance of Positive Emotions Being Mindful of Emotions Decreases Intensity Grief is Not Depression To Cry or Not to Cry? Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood Afraid of Feeling Good? Leave Work at Work: Emotional Detachment Fitness and Health When Health Policies Run Amok and Good Parenting Causes Problems: Peanut Allergies Children Prefer Activity Forgiveness Can Impact Heart Health More Than Traditional Medical Treatments Hate Exercise? Fountain of Youth: Exercise Slows Mental Decline Exercise Can Help Adolescents With Depression Happiness and Well-being Compassion, Not Pity Happy Friends Can Improve Your Health Can a Gratitude List Make a Difference in Your Life? Managing Adversity Improves the Outcome of Happiness The Only Way to Have a Balanced Life is to Do It Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Why You Don't Need to Be Happy Buying Happiness: It Can Be Done! Not Happy? Just Wait... Is It True that Parents are Less Happy than Non-parents? How Can Each of Us Make a Difference in the World? Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong The Danger of Seeking Happiness: How to Protect Your Children The Pursuit of Happiness or the Pursuit of Money? Can't Force Happiness on Someone "I Like It When You..." Money May Not Buy Happiness, But How You Spend Money May Help Want to Live a Long and Happy Life? Harnessing Happiness When You Have Depression Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! mHealth Happiness Seekers and Effectiveness Getting Better With Age: Improved Well-being Intelligence, Health and Happiness Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You Mental Abilities and Memory Can't Think When You're Hungry? Intuitive vs. Deliberate Thinking: Which is Better? Think Multi-tasking Makes You More Efficient? Think Again! Do You Want an Education or Do You Want a Grade? Curious About Improving Your Memory? Influence of Exaggerated News Stories: It's Not That You're Stupid, It's the Nature of Memory Improving Attention and Quality of Effort Fountain of Youth: Exercise Slows Mental Decline The Pesky Chemical Causing Social Memory Problems Wii Brain Training: Fun, But Useful? Your Brain: Use It or Lose It? Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Compassion: Selflessness With a Selfish Purpose There's a Time for Mindlessness, Too When Anxiety is Caused by Mindfulness Practice Shouldn't Mindfulness Be Free? May You Have a Mindful New Year! Persistence, Zest for Life, and Mindfulness Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Does Mindfulness Make You Good? No, but Does It Matter? The Time to Relax is When You Don't Have the Time List of Stress Management Methods Stressed About Managing Stress? Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists Mindfulness is Simply Being Without Judgment Mindful Passion Mindfulness: What's in a Name? Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants The Mindful Journey The Benefits of Mindfully Washing Dishes The Difference Between Mindful Focus and a Mindful Attitude Mindfulness Training Shows Promise for Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Mindfulness and Managing Chronic Pain How We Might Stop Bullying: Kindness Curriculum for Preschoolers Practicing Loving-Kindness May Elicit Resentments How Mindfulness Can Reduce Risk for Alzheimer's and Heart Disease Mindful Attention to Unhealthy Foods Improves Food Choices Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong Mindful Dating: How Does Mindfulness Affect Satisfaction in Relationships? 10 Everyday Frustrations and a Mindful Attitude What is the Difference Between Mindful Acceptance and Emotional Suppression? Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder The Paradox of the Mindful Attitude The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Addiction to Emotions and Mindfulness Practice Mindfulness Practice is Not Focusing, It is Re-Focusing How Much Should You Practice Mindfulness? For Fun--Try Being Mindful About the Weather What Could Be More Mindful Than a Cat Watching Bird Videos? Wisdom Doesn't Come In Sound Bites Qigong Can Reduce Depression Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Acceptance as the Basis for Wisdom? I want to feel good NOW! The 20-Minute a Day Miracle Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Being Mindful of Emotions Decreases Intensity Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Mindfulness and Flow in the Workplace Mindfulness May Prevent Relapse Is Mindfulness-Based Therapy Effective? Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood Mindfulness Skills Can Improve Relationships Pain Management It's Not What You Think But Also How You Think That Affects Chronic Pain Stressed About Managing Stress? Tension: The Worst Thing for Pain Mindfulness and Managing Chronic Pain Managing Chronic Pain Through "Decentering" Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Parenting Effects of Managing Childrens' Media Viewing Encouraging Task Persistence to Help Children Achieve in Life Teaching Resilience When Health Policies Run Amok and Good Parenting Causes Problems: Peanut Allergies The Physical Toll on Empathetic Parents and How to Find Balance Is It True that Parents are Less Happy than Non-parents? Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Children Prefer Activity Secure Attachment to Parents Improves College Adjustment A Good Night's Sleep Doesn't Overcome the Stress of Controlling Parents Mom: Let Go of the Guilt How We Might Stop Bullying: Kindness Curriculum for Preschoolers Helicopter Parenting: When Is Parental Involvement Too Much? The Danger of Seeking Happiness: How to Protect Your Children Aggressive Children Can Learn Control Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Praising Children Can Reduce Performance The "Kleptoparasite" Bird Steals Food Through Intermittent Reinforcement How Playing Violent Video Games Affects Your Children Is It More Important for Your Children to Love You or Trust You? Rewarding Desired Behavior vs. Everyone Gets a Reward Teaching Children How to Handle Adversity Another Natural Consequence Example Natural Consequences for Children "Just Enough" Parenting Style "Common Sense" Approach to Praise Can Worsen Self-esteem in Vulnerable Children Violent Video Games Cause Aggression Perfectionism The Value of Each and Every Life and How Perfectionism Destroys that Value Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Performance, Success and Goal Attainment Staying Motivated with a New Exercise Program Uncertainty, Decision-making, and Stress Can't Think When You're Hungry? An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Life is Like...Planning a New Vegetable Garden Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? Helping Children Achieve Their Potential How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Do We Really WANT to Educate Our Children? Do You Want an Education or Do You Want a Grade? Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? Why Set Goals If 50% of New Year's Resolutions are Broken by Three Months? What Determines the Success of New Year's Resolutions? Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Listening to Your Heart Helps Moral Decision-Making: But is it Good for Fear Avoidance Decisions? Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Improving Attention and Quality of Effort How Both Overly Positive and Negative Misperceptions of Performance Can Affect You Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Personality Borderline Personality Disorder and Lack of Confidence When Interpreting Emotions Does Loving Yourself Make You a Narcissist? Risk is a Matter of Perception: What is Risk to You? When Do Good People Cheat? Or, Developing Compassion by Recognizing Your Flaws People-pleasing 101 The Physical Toll on Empathetic Parents and How to Find Balance Can Being Shy Affect Your Well-being and Relationship? Yes, but It Depends... How Honest Are You? Introverts are Important, Too! Forgiveness Isn't Always a Virtue Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! Don't Be Too Unselfish in a Group--You Might Be Removed Effects of Introversion When a Person has Panic Disorder Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Physical Health Happy Friends Can Improve Your Health On the Importance of Healthy Eating When Severely Depressed Gut Bacteria, Auto-immune Diseases, and Depression An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Recovering from the Physical Assault of Surgery or Intensive Care Spending Money on Others Can Lower Blood Pressure Do You Worry When Waiting for Medical Test Results? If You Are Sick, Does That Mean You Are Irrational? How Mindfulness Can Reduce Risk for Alzheimer's and Heart Disease The 20-Minute a Day Miracle Can Sleeping Pills Shorten Your Life? Intelligence, Health and Happiness CBT Reduces Anxiety During Breast Cancer Treatment Is Rage Worth the Physical Suffering? Policies and Issues in Mental Health Personal Responsibility is Politically Incorrect? When Everyone is Traumatized What Happens to Those Who Are Truly Suffering? Evaluating Psychological Information in the Information Age Why Social Anxiety Disorder may be Created by Culture It's Just Words When Emotional Reasoning Interferes With Having a Dialog About Micro-aggressions The Influence of News Commentators Does Mindfulness Make You Good? No, but Does It Matter? What Causes People to Live Longer When They Retire Later? Limitations of Research Do You Worry When Waiting for Medical Test Results? Most Kids Ignore Cyber-Bullying Understanding Research: Colors, Happiness, and Weight Loss When Health Policies Run Amok and Good Parenting Causes Problems: Peanut Allergies When Doctors Don't Listen Women and the Decline of Violence (Part 3) Are We Evolving? Thoughts on Violence (Part 2) Violence is Declining (Part 1) Three Ways to Save on Your Prescription Drug Costs Advice in Context or Why Diagnosis is Important What Do the Nuremberg War Criminals and Facebook Have in Common? Human Experimentation Without "Informed" Consent Is the Wall Street Journal Suggesting That Facebook Should Discriminate Against Those With Mental Illness? What I Could Do If I Were Facebook: Would This Be Acceptable to You? Is It Okay to Profile Those on the Autistic Spectrum? Lies, Damned Lies, and Statistics How Playing Violent Video Games Affects Your Children Drug Companies to Profit From Grief? An Opinion Relationships The Secret of Strong Relationships Why People Blame Others The Essence of a Good Marriage: Friendship Why Are People Mean? When You Love a Narcissist Be Careful Accusing Someone of Lying Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Reality TV Distorts Beliefs About Others Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Steps to Reduce Holiday Stress When Encountering Family Demands You Have to Be Willing to Set Limits with Disrespectful Adult Children Escaping the Rubber Fence" Family Young Adults Can Improve Romantic Relationships by Learning to Be Okay Alone Do You Love Me? Do You REALLY Love Me? Do You Understand Me? Conflict in Relationships Toxic Parents: Mean or Emotionally Distressed? I've Been There Doesn't Always Mean I Support You Mindful Dating: How Does Mindfulness Affect Satisfaction in Relationships? When Bad Things Happen, Share the Good Do You Seek Reassurance of Love? That Might Be Okay...Unless... Successful Marriages Require Emotional Control What You Watch Influences Your Romantic Beliefs "I Like It When You..." Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Connecting Through Emotions When to Criticize Your Partner Don't Be Too Unselfish in a Group--You Might Be Removed Laugh in the Face of Adversity: Reducing Stress During Marital Conflict Superman Effect? Wear Red to Attract Women Body Image and Marital Satisfaction "I Think She Wants Me!" A Study of Sexual Misperception Security in Relationships Related to Less Dishonesty Forgiveness Isn't Always the Best Policy Marital Conflict: When Bad is Good and When It's Bad Time Plus Value: Equation for Forgiveness? Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You Mindfulness Skills Can Improve Relationships Early Marital Disillusionment Predicts Later Divorce Predicting Successful Relationships: Attachment Security Rejection Sensitivity Do You Seek Reassurance of Love? That Might Be Okay...Unless... Do You Trust Your Partner's Expression of Acceptance? Do You Have Gelotophobia? More Than 11% of People Do Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements How Do You Handle Rejection? Self-esteem and Self-efficacy Don't Accept Criticism Without Evaluating the Source Does Loving Yourself Make You a Narcissist? The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Selfies: A Sign of Low Self-esteem? Think Again Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Empathy Requires a Strong Sense of Self Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem "Common Sense" Approach to Praise Can Worsen Self-esteem in Vulnerable Children Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Sleep Disturbance The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Can Sleeping Pills Shorten Your Life? Insomnia: Does Counting Sheep Work? Stress Management Treatment for Insomnia Social Anxiety Why Social Anxiety Disorder may be Created by Culture Can Being Shy Affect Your Well-being and Relationship? Yes, but It Depends... Anxiety Disorders May Not Be As Prevalent As We Thought Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Can Facebook Make You More Anxious When Meeting Someone? Social Anxiety and Bias in Forming Impressions Acts of Kindness and Social Anxiety Don't Be Too Unselfish in a Group--You Might Be Removed How Do You Handle Rejection? The Pesky Chemical Causing Social Memory Problems Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Predicting Successful Relationships: Attachment Security Social Media and the Internet The Influence of News Commentators Selfies: A Sign of Low Self-esteem? Think Again Why Do You Use Social Media? Influence of Exaggerated News Stories: It's Not That You're Stupid, It's the Nature of Memory Can Facebook Make You More Anxious When Meeting Someone? mHealth Happiness Seekers and Effectiveness Lying Online: Be Careful What You Read Stress and Coping Signs You Are Not Thriving on Stress When Stress Management Training in the Workplace Can Be Harmful Uncertainty, Decision-making, and Stress Is the Stress Hormone Good or Bad? Spending Money on Others Can Lower Blood Pressure Stressed About Managing Stress? Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? When Bad Things Happen, Share the Good Do You Work Better Under Stress? Laugh in the Face of Adversity: Reducing Stress During Marital Conflict Lunch Break or Stress Break? Coping With Traumatic Stress Trauma and PTSD When Everyone is Traumatized What Happens to Those Who Are Truly Suffering? Perception of Family Criticism Impedes Recovery from Panic Disorder Toxic Parents: Mean or Emotionally Distressed? I've Been There Doesn't Always Mean I Support You Does Trauma Cause Depression? Coping With Traumatic Stress Weight Control and Body Image Is Diet a Cause or Consequence of Depression? And How is Impulsiveness Related? Why Dieting May Be Painful and What You Can Do About It How Something Tastes is Influenced By Your Thinking An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Using the Cognitive Diary for Eating Disorders Will-power or Strategy? Is Being Overweight Healthy? Children Prefer Activity The Truth About Aging and Dieting Mindful Attention to Unhealthy Foods Improves Food Choices Binge Eating: CBT vs. Medication Eat Anything You Want--Just Cook It Yourself Plan Before You Lose Weight Hate Exercise? Do You Believe You Can Lose Weight? Body Image and Marital Satisfaction Work and Productivity Time Pressure and Work Performance: Finding Balance Changing Thinking About Work Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Do You Work Better Under Stress? Mindfulness and Flow in the Workplace Lunch Break or Stress Break? Leave Work at Work: Emotional Detachment Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Lies, Damned Lies, and Statistics by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Sometimes agendas are beneficent and sometimes they are self-serving, but agendas always exist. Therefore, to fully evaluate the statistics, the agenda of the reporter needs to be considered." Tweet Not a day goes by when I don't throw down the morning newspaper complaining about the use of statistics in an article. In our world the media liberally sprinkles statistics throughout articles and television programs to support a point of view. The problem, however, is that statistics are frequently misleading if not outright inaccurate. Without a clear understanding of the nature of statistics and the definitions of statistical terms, the public believes the statistic-supported statements as if they are fact. In addition, without understanding the agenda of the journalist or analyst using the statistics, the public accepts these "facts" uncritically. And yet, if we "look under the hood" we will find the true nature of how statistics work. Recently The Wall Street Journal published an article regarding the health benefits of exercise (Landro, January 5, 2010). Most people who know me or who have read much on my website know that I'm a strong supporter of exercise, so in choosing this article to review and dissect, I am choosing one that has the same agenda I do: increase people's awareness of the benefits of exercise. Therefore, there should be less bias on my part in critiquing such an article since I support the underlying premise. In addition, I chose The Wall Street Journal because of its reputation whereas an article from a less respected source could easily be dismissed as "atypical." Even though I am using an article on exercise as my example of the problems with statistics, we could take any article on any topic and find the same problems. Once you have a better understanding of the use of statistics try applying the concepts learned here to the global warming controversy or to the efficacy of medications. You might discover some very interesting "facts." Why are the underlying numbers important? Most articles as the one I'm quoting report the percentage of risk or the percentage of improvement but do not indicate the underlying numbers that were used. As a result, the conclusions are based upon meaningless numbers. For instance, the article mentioned above indicates that "studies show that exercise can lower the risk of colon cancer by over 60%." On the surface this statement is most probably accurate. In addition, it sounds pretty impressive. Who wouldn't want to reduce a potentially fatal disease by over 60%? However, what does that number really mean? Without the baseline number indicating actual risk, the claim of 60% reduction is meaningless. For example, if the chances of having colon cancer (the following numbers are made up) were 1 out of 10 or 10%, and if our risk of colon cancer is reduced 60% by exercise we now have a 6% chance of colon cancer. That may be considered a significant enough reduction that a person is willing to exercise routinely for the health benefit. However, the actual annual incidence in the U.S. (I'm rounding all numbers so they are easier to understand) of colorectal cancer is .05% or 1 out of 2000 if we use a population figure of 300 million. So, if we consider that exercise reduces the "risk" of colon cancer which is .05%, to determine the actual change we multiply the risk (.05%) by the reduction (60%) and find that the risk for exercisers is .03% or 1 out of 3333. What this means is that if you are an exerciser the chance of colon cancer would be 1 out of 3333 instead of 1 out of 2000. For some people, such as myself, this would be significant enough to change their behavior, for others it would not. It depends upon what the change means to the individual. For instance, if these numbers were instead reported for non-chocolate eaters (in other words, I would have to give up chocolate) rather than exercisers, I would probably consider the reduction in my quality of life to not be worth the reduction of risk. My point is that we need to know the underlying numbers to make an informed decision instead of relying on someone else to tell us what the numbers mean and what we "should" do. Certainly, the purpose of this article is not to give people another excuse not to exercise. Therefore, let's use a different example that has different underlying numbers. The Wall Street Journal (January 5, 2010) indicates that exercise "reduces the incidence of diabetes by approximately 50%." You may think, "That's not even as good as the 60% reduction for colon cancer and she just showed that my chances of colon cancer are not high." But wait a minute! We need to look at the underlying numbers for diabetes and we will see an entirely different picture. The annual incidence of diabetics in the U.S. is 1 out of 340 or .29% or 798,000 people develop Type 2 diabetes each year. Therefore, to determine the difference regarding how exercise impacts the development of diabetes, we again (as we did with colon cancer) multiply the risk (.29%) by the reduction (50%) and find that the risk for exercisers is .17% or 1 out of 588 (using a U.S. population figure of 275,000,000 as the source did). Now this may be much more significant for many people. It certainly was for me. I was at risk for developing diabetes 15 years ago because I already had an insulin-resistant disorder and a family history of diabetes. However, I didn't like the idea of giving up sweets, especially chocolate, for the rest of my life so I decided to lose weight and exercise. As a result, my blood sugars, blood pressure, and cholesterol are all perfect and I can still eat chocolate (within reason). Having information regarding the effect of exercise on the development of diabetes provided me with a method to gain greater control over my health. If this hasn't convinced you of both the importance of the underlying numbers for understanding statistics as well as the importance of exercise, read the section below under definition of incidence regarding hypertension. Definitions Failure to clearly define terms can lead to inaccuracies in the reporting of statistics. Frequently, by the time statistics are reported to the public the writer is not the statistician who compiled the statistics but typically a writer who has little or no training on the interpretation of statistics or understanding of mathematics. Therefore, although statisticians may define terms precisely, the terms used in many articles are imprecise or the same terms are used inaccurately. For instance, to understand the basics of statistics one must understand the difference between prevalence and incidence of diseases. Prevalence is the number of cases in a population during a particular time period typically the lifetime. Although prevalence can be any specified time period, most popular media use the concept of "lifetime prevalence" although they frequently only state "prevalence" and we must assume they are referring to lifetime prevalence. However, it does make a difference what number they are reporting. For example, the one-year prevalence of anxiety disorders in the adult population, meaning the number of cases that are present in a typical year, is 18% (Kessler, Chiu, et al, 2005) whereas the lifetime prevalence for anxiety disorders in the adult is almost 29% (Kessler, Berlund, et al, 2005). So, if I was trying to make a point to a college class about how common anxiety disorders are I could say, "Look around you. One out of every five people you see in this room have an anxiety disorder" because I'm using the concept of one-year prevalence and since few anxiety disorders are resolved in less than a year, I'm referring to how many people currently present in the room have an anxiety disorder. However, I could also make a similar, but different, point if I was to say to a client with an anxiety disorder "You are not unusual. Over the course of their lifetime, almost 1 in 3 adults will suffer with an anxiety disorder." These comments are based on different statistics: one-year prevalence versus lifetime prevalence. Incidence is the number of new cases that occur in a population during a specified period which is typically reported as annual incidence. Incidence is usually reported as a rate which is the number of people who developed the disease during the period divided by the population. So, if we are looking at the incidence of diabetes reported above we can obtain the U.S. rate of .29% by dividing 798,000 (number of annual cases) by 275,000,000 (the population of the U.S. at the time the statistics were obtained). Incidence statistics tend to be used to indicate the "risk" of developing a disease. A great deal of confusion occurs between the terms of "prevalence" and "incidence" and, unfortunately, many writers of publicly disseminated information use these terms interchangeably. For example, when I searched the web for the incidence of hypertension I found the following statement on a site called "Up to Date Online" providing medical information to the public: "NHANES data from 1999-2000 and United States Census bureau information demonstrated a 29 to 31 percent incidence (italics mine) of hypertension in the 18 year and older population of the United States (www.utdol.com)." Knowing the correct definition of "incidence" I would translate this statement to mean that there are 29 to 31 percent new cases of hypertension every year. You can see how ridiculous that is because it would mean the entire population of the U.S. would have high-blood pressure within 4 years! I don't know the quality of the site from which I obtained this data, however, I do know that they are using the term "incidence" inappropriately which causes me to question other data they provide. This common error of confusing the two also tends to create further inaccuracies in the reporting of statistics. If I wasn't a savvy reader I could easily pass on their incidence data to other unsuspecting readers contributing to the confusion among the public. The Wall Street Journal reported that exercise reduces the incidence of high-blood pressure by 40%. Even though articles published on websites used the term "incidence," I had trouble finding true incidence figures because most information about high-blood pressure focuses upon prevalence statistics. This is due to the difference between a chronic disorder such as hypertension and an acute disorder such as the flu. Annual incidence is a more important statistic for the flu because the prevalence statistic would not be meaningful as people only have the flu for a short period of time. However, the Wall Street Journal article reported the risk or incidence of developing hypertension for exercisers and non-exercisers so I needed to use the same type of statistic in order to examine the meaning of the percentages. Therefore, incidence is 1 out of 31 (extrapolating from Canadian statistics: Tu, 2008) or over 3% of population of the adult population. Again, by multiplying risk (3%) by reduction (40%) we obtain an incidence of approximately 1% for exercisers which would be equivalent to 1 out of 100. Now that might be considered a substantial difference by most people's standards. In addition to that, since hypertension is a chronic disorder, if everyone in the U.S. exercised, the number of people with hypertension would be reduced over a 5-year period by 14 million people! Agendas Sometimes agendas are beneficent and sometimes they are self-serving, but agendas always exist. Therefore, to fully evaluate the statistics, the agenda of the reporter needs to be considered. Usually the primary source of data, the scientific article, is fairly free from bias as it typically needs to provide all the underlying numbers and to be clear and precise with the interpretation of these numbers to be eligible for publishing in a scientific journal. However, the further away from the primary source and the more times the results have been paraphrased, the more potential for inaccuracies exist. So, understanding the agenda of the reporter can help with interpreting the data. However, certain assumptions must be made about agendas. For instance, I assume that the agenda for the journalist who wrote the article for The Wall Street Journal article described above is to provide an interesting, accurate article that will inform the public about an important topic. However, what is the agenda of her source for the statistics she provided? One source mentioned in the sidebar to the article (from which the percentage statistics discussed above were drawn) is the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM). A search on the internet shows the ACSM to be a professional society providing basic and applied exercise science conferences, meetings and workshops. I certainly to not want to denigrate an organization I know little about, but it is possible that their agenda is to convince others of the importance of exercise so as to obtain paid registrants to their conferences and workshops? If that were the case, they may be more likely to present data in a positively skewed format such as using percentages instead of providing the underlying numbers. Although another possibility is that they did provide the underlying numbers but the newspaper didn't use them because extreme numbers are more likely to sell newspapers. I'm not saying that I know this is the case in this situation but it is part of what we need to consider when determining other's agendas. To determine agendas we want to speculate as to what benefit the individual or the organization obtains from providing the information. This allows us to determine why we might find certain inaccuracies in the information provided. For instance, a statement in the sidebar of The Wall Street Journal Article states that according to the ACSM exercise can "decrease depression as effectively as Prozac or behavioral therapy." As a behavioral therapist myself, I am puzzled by this statement because I know that behavioral therapy is about changing behaviors which would include the behavior of exercise. So, of course exercise is as effective as behavioral therapy at decreasing depression because exercise is one of the tools of behavioral therapy. What I don't know is what study this statement was derived from: was it research examining the difference between medication, therapist-aided behavioral therapy, and exercise alone? In which case, I would also want to know how the subjects were motivated to exercise: were they self-motivated or did the researcher ask them to exercise? If they were asked to exercise, how was that condition of the research different from the therapist-aided behavioral therapy? I could continue with this line of questioning but I just want to give you an idea of some of the questions that can be considered when evaluating data that is provided to the public. For all I know, the source of this statement may have an anti-therapy bias, which agenda may bias the overall presentation of the statistics. Although there are many other issues to be considered when evaluating the statistics that are presented by the national media, I hope that I have provided you with an understanding of some of the most critical issues to evaluate as you read or hear statistics that are presented. In another article I intend to use the concepts presented here to evaluate the efficacy of medications and how to determine whether the benefits outweigh the side effects. * "Figures often beguile me, particularly when I have the arranging of them myself; in which case the remark attributed to Disraeli would often apply with justice and force: 'There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies and statistics (Benjamin Disraeli).'" - Mark Twain's Own Autobiography: The Chapters from the North American Review Lifetime Prevalence and Age-of-Onset Distributions of DSM-IV Disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602. Kessler R.C., Chiu W.T., Demler O., Walters E.E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of twelve-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617-27. Landro, L. (2010, Jan. 5). The Hidden Benefits of Exercise. The Wall Street Jounal. New York: Dow Jones & Company. Tu, K., Chen, Z., & Libscombe, L.L. for the Canadian Hypertension Education Program Outcomes Research Taskforce (2008). Prevalence and incidence of hypertension from 1995 to 2005: a population-based study. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 178, 1429-1435. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy, and Impact on Relationships If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy, and Impact on Relationships by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen Also read: The Porcupine Effect: Pushing Others Away When You Want to Connect "Individuals who are rejection-sensitive are more likely to perceive rejection in situations others may not interpret as rejection." Tweet As a child Cynthia's hyperactive behavior often annoyed others. Her teachers frequently reprimanded her in school. The other students called her "stupid" and refused to let her join them in activities. At home, her father criticized her and beat her with a belt whenever her parents received a negative report from school. Due to depression, her mother tended to ignore Cynthia's needs for emotional support and attention. As a result, she grew up expecting rejection from others. It seemed that no matter how hard she tried, all she experienced was rejection. As an adult she had numerous unsuccessful relationships. She desperately wanted the acceptance to be found in a relationship; however, she perceived her partner's behavior negatively often thinking about how he wasn't as committed to the relationship and that she was just good enough until someone else came along. These thoughts led to hostility toward him and accusations "You don't care about me!" Due to her focus on her worries about losing him she did not focus on his needs and provide him with emotional support. Her partner tried to reassure her and comfort her at first but the constant negativity and hostility drained his ability to respond to her needs. Jake was physically abused as a child; for seemingly no reason to Jake his alcoholic father became enraged and beat him leaving bruises and welts. These beatings included screaming at Jake about how worthless he was and that no one could possibly ever want him or love him. His mother was rejecting in a more subtle way by tending to blame him for his father's behavior "If you just wouldn't set him off, he wouldn't hurt you." When Jake developed an intimate relationship as an adult, he perceived his wife's behavior as indicating she was cheating on him. He examined her phone records and questioned her endlessly about calls she made. He didn't allow her to go out socially unless he was present and even then he questioned her about her interest in other men if she talked to someone. His wife could not convince him she was not having an affair. Eventually, his irrational jealousy led to slapping her when she denied his accusations. What do these two people have in common? They developed rejection sensitivity due to childhood experiences which led to irrational thinking and behavior about their adult relationships. This thinking and behavior often reinforced itself by creating situations in which they were more likely to be rejected. What is Rejection Sensitivity? Individuals who are rejection-sensitive are more likely to perceive rejection in situations others may not interpret as rejection. For instance, they may think, "He didn't respond right away to my text message, so I must not be important to him." This thinking frequently creates stress and anxiety. Whereas the same situation may not even register to another person as involving rejection; they may not expect an immediate response or they may understand that response latency may not be directly related with how important the other person thinks they may be. Or even if they do consider it related, they may not view lack of importance as rejection and may be able to shrug it off as meaningless. In addition, someone who is rejection-sensitive is more likely to overreact to rejection. They may view rejection as horrible whereas someone else may view it as just a normal thing that occurs because people are different and no one can be liked by everyone. Therefore, the person who views rejection as "horrible" often feels an intense need to avoid situations that may potentially involve rejection. What is Irrational Jealousy? Irrational jealousy is jealousy that has no basis in fact. In other words, the individual perceives situations as meaning that their partner is likely to reject them when the partner has no intention of doing so. Thus, irrational jealousy is a thinking style in which an individual evaluates a situation negatively and makes assumptions base on that evaluation. Those assumptions are usually related to losing their partner due to a rival. How is Rejection Sensitivity Related to Childhood Abuse? Scott Feldman and Geraldine Downey (1994), psychologists who conducted a number of studies examining rejection sensitivity indicated that a link existed between adult sensitivity to rejection and childhood experience with rejecting parents. One of the tasks of childhood is to learn how to relate to the world around us. However, our primary experience is with a select few adults including our family and our teachers. If this experience teaches us that those closest to us are likely to hurt us and reject us, we carry this knowledge with us into adulthood. Erik Erikson described the stages of psychosocial development over fifty years ago. For our purposes, his first two stages directly relate to the development of rejection sensitivity: trust vs. mistrust stage and autonomy vs. shame and guilt. During the first year of development, if the child learns that his needs are not likely to be met he will develop mistrust. During the second year of the development if the child is made to feel bad or wrong about normal exploration of the world around her, she will develop shame and guilt. Accordingly, if these stages are not successfully resolved the child will not be able to move on and successfully manage the other stages of psychosocial development including but not limited to the stage of identity development and the stage of intimacy. Thus, in the example above, Jake was physically abused by his father and blamed for the abuse by his mother. Typically, we are taught that our parents love us and protect us, so it is reasonable for a child to come to the conclusion that if he can be treated this way by the people who are supposed to love him the most, then the rest of the world must be the same or worse. In fact, sometimes children are taught this specifically. Imagine Jake's father saying to him, "You better respect me because no one else would ever put up with you." As a result of his treatment by his parents, Jake developed a mistrust of people, especially those who love him, and felt shame and guilt because of his inability to act in a way that would cause them to treat him better. Therefore, in his adult intimate relationships he became jealous and controlling. What is the Relationship Between Rejection Sensitivity, Self-esteem, and Social Anxiety? Although Downey and Feldman (1996) found that there is a relationship between rejection sensitivity and self-esteem as well as between rejection sensitivity and social anxiety and the personality characteristic of introversion, they did not find that this relationship explained the connection between rejection sensitivity and poor intimate relationships. In other words, an individual may have low self-esteem or high social anxiety or be introverted, but their perception of rejection may be accurate and they may not over-react to rejection. So, the problem is due more to tendency to expect rejection in intimate relationships, perceive rejection when it may not be present, and to see rejection in an extremely negative manner. How Does Expectation of Rejection Affect Perception of Rejection? There's an old story about a traveling salesman who has a flat while he is driving a country road. He looks in his trunk and discovers that he is missing his jack. So he thinks, "There's a farmhouse a couple miles back, I'm sure the farmer will be able to help me." However, as he starts walking he begins to think, "Why should he put himself out and help a stranger? I'll probably need to pay him 5 or 10 dollars." As he continues to walk, his thinking becomes even more negative, "Why should 10 dollars be enough? He really has me over a barrel. Why should he even help me at all?" By the time he reaches the farmhouse he is convinced that the farmer will take advantage of him. When the farmer opens the door and asks "What can I do for you?" the man sputters in anger "You can just take your jack and shove it!" This story illustrates how we can expect rejection in a situation, respond to the situation as if there is rejection, and then most likely create rejection. Downey and Feldman (1996) did an interesting study with college students to examine the relation between expectation of rejection and perception of rejection. They had previously developed a questionnaire to measure rejection sensitivity. The questions asked about hypothetical situations and the degree of anxiety about the outcome as well as the expectation of rejection. Some of the situations included: You ask someone in class if you can borrow his/her notes; You ask a friend to do you a big favor; You call your boyfriend/girlfriend after a bitter argument and tell him/her you want to see him/her. In the study, the students were placed in an ambiguous situation in which rejection-sensitive people were more likely to feel rejected whereas others were not. The situation involved having a short conversation with an opposite-sex stranger (who was actually one of the experimenters which was unknown to the student) and being told that it would be followed by a break and then another short conversation. However, after the first conversation the students were told that their partner chose not to continue with the experiment and no other explanation was given. The control situation was similar except the students were told their partner did not continue due to time constraints. The researchers found that the students who were high in rejection sensitivity and were not given an explanation for their partner's decision not to return for the second conversation tended to provoke feelings of rejection and statements of " 'I felt so badly. I wondered what I had done wrong' and 'I was worried that I had bored him (Downey and Feldman, 1996).' " Whereas people with low rejection sensitivity did not react with negative emotions. How Does Rejection Sensitivity Impact an Intimate Relationship? Downey and Feldman (1996) furthered examined how an individual's level of rejection sensitivity might affect their intimate relationships. First, they conducted a study to determine the relation between rejection sensitivity and the tendency to interpret insensitive behavior by their intimate partner as a deliberate desire to be hurtful. They assessed students for rejection sensitivity prior to beginning a romantic relationship. After they began a new relationship, scenarios that could be considered insensitive but could have occurred for a number of reasons were posed to them such as "If your boyfriend or girlfriend was being cool and distant, you would feel he or she was being intentionally hurtful to you." They found that high levels of rejection sensitivity predicted the likelihood that the student would interpret their new partner's insensitive behavior as having hurtful intent. In a related study Downey and Feldman (1996) recruited couples in a committed, nonmarital relationship to complete questionnaires designed to examine how this tendency to negatively interpret insensitive behavior would impact the relationship. They found significant correspondence between rejection sensitivity and relationship security, relationship satisfaction, and behaviors that jeopardize the relationship. 1) Relationship Security. They examined the relation between rejection-sensitive people and their perception of their partner's commitment to the relationship. The results indicated that rejection-sensitive people were more likely to believe and to be concern that their partner was likely to leave the relationship. This response occurred no matter what the partner's level of commitment actually was. In other words, even when the partner was fully committed to the relationship, the rejection-sensitive individual still believed he/she wanted to end the relationship. 2) Relationship Satisfaction. Although they found that the partner's of rejection-sensitive people were less satisfied with the relationship, the rejection-sensitive people tended to exaggerate the degree of dissatisfaction they thought their partner experienced. Possibly, the dissatisfaction that was experienced was due to the problematic behaviors in which rejection-sensitive people engage. 3) Behaviors Jeopardize Relationship. Therefore, Downey and Feldman (1996) examined the behaviors of rejection-sensitive people that could jeopardize the relationship. Although rejection-sensitive people were more likely to engage in self-defeating behavior, a difference occurred in the type of behavior in which men engaged and women engaged. In particular, it was found that men tended to engage in more jealous controlling behavior. These behaviors may include being particularly reactive to, jealous of, and controlling of their partners contact with potential rivals. Many of these behaviors could potentially lead to physical abuse. Downey and Feldman interpreted these behaviors as being based upon men's tendency to want to actively solve problems. However, rejection-sensitive women relationship behaviors tend to include hostility and lack of emotional support. Frequently, women's hostility is reflected in negative comments/criticism and non-verbal disapproval. Downey and Feldman attribute the rejection-sensitive women's behavior as due to women's tendency to worry and to retaliate for perceived offenses. An example may be a tendency to be sexually cold when she feels her boyfriend is paying too much attention to another woman. They believe that this pattern is likely to cause the women to be less invested in the relationship and less positive towards their boyfriend. How is Rejection Sensitivity Self-perpetuating? Rejection sensitivity tends to create increased rejection sensitivity due to the process of self-fulfilling prophecy. A self-fulfilling prophecy occurs when an individual creates an outcome based upon his/her belief about the outcome. For example, if a football field kicker believes he is likely to miss a kick becaue he missed the last two kicks, his chances of missing are increased and he may create the outcome he feared. Rejection sensitivity reinforces the irrational beliefs that the individual will be rejected and that other people can't be trusted because the behaviors in which the rejection-sensitive people engage will often cause the termination of a relationship. Thus, with the failure of each relationship the individual becomes more and more convinced that these beliefs are valid. They often don't recognize that it was their behaviors due to their fear of rejection that caused the problems in the relationship. How Can Rejection Sensitivity Be Changed? 1) Recognize the rejection sensitivity. For an individual to be able to make changes, they have to first recognize the problems and the behaviors that are self-defeating. In this instance, it is important to stop blaming other people and to stop examining others' behavior for every nuance that could be considered as potentially rejecting. Instead, the individual needs to recognize their sensitivity to rejection, how it causes them to frequently misinterpret others' behavior and intention, and lead to problematic behaviors that can be destructive to the relationship. Once the individual recognizes the reality of the situation, he/she can begin to take the steps to change. 2) Challenge the irrational beliefs. Cognitive restructuring is a technique that focuses on changing the underlying thought processes that tend to create and perpetuate the behavior. One method of cognitive restructuring is "reframing" which involves recognizing other possible reasons for the behavior. The rejection-sensitive person often believes there is only one possible interpretation of a situation and that interpretation involves being rejected. Thus, if their partner's behavior is "cool and distant" they may believe their partner's satisfaction in the relationship has declined. However, it is also possible that the partner may be worried about something unrelated to the relationship and they may feel they are protecting the partner by not sharing their worries. Or the partner may be dealing with a problem such as depression which causes him/her to withdraw. If we thought about it, we could probably come up with many other reasons for this behavior. Therefore, the reframing technique requires the rejection-sensitive person to look at some of these other possibilities and to recognize that if other possible explanations exist, their interpretation may not be accurate. Another way to challenge the irrational thinking is to recognize the fallacy in the belief that we "should never be rejected." Instead of seeing rejection as a bad thing, we could see it as a good thing. For instance, many people believe that they should make a new relationship work at all costs. This is not a good idea. What happens when you passively allow your partner to make the decisions in the relationship even when you don't agree? You're likely to build resentment and eventually it will impact the relationship. It is better to recognize the potential for rejection as a way of determining the "fit" of the relationship. For instance, instead of just agreeing with your partner, you voice your opinion. Now there are different possible outcomes. One possible outcome is that your disagreement leads to a discussion which leads to a resolution of the problem. Another possible outcome is that your partner becomes demanding about his/her decision and refuses to listen to you. Now, based on what outcome occurs, you have information about whether this relationship is the right "fit" for you. 3) Mistake practice technique. Once an individual has begun to change the thinking about rejection, he/she may try some "experiments" to show that their perception of rejection may be inaccurate or exaggerated. One way of doing this is a technique called "mistake practice." This technique helps to change beliefs about making minor mistakes. An individual who is rejection-sensitive may believe that relatively minor mistakes that everyone makes are catastrophic and other people won't like them as a result. An example of this is calling someone by the wrong name. This is a common error, one which most people take in stride, often don't think twice about, and certainly don't view as "horrible" and a reason to reject someone. However, someone who is rejection-sensitive may be horrified at such a mistake. Mistake practice involves making a list of minor mistakes that would cause you to be uncomfortable, put this list in order from easiest to hardest, and then deliberately make a mistake. So, if you're concerned about calling someone by the wrong name, you would deliberately do so. The idea is that after you make this mistake a few times, you find that are other people aren't reacting as negatively as you anticipated. 4) Exposure practice to rejection. Exposure practice is similar to mistake practice except it is to deliberately elicit rejection and to prove to yourself that you can handle and survive rejection. For instance, Albert Ellis, the founder of Rational Emotive Therapy, was terrified of asking women out for fear of being rejected. To overcome his fear he was determined to ask a hundred women out recognizing that he would be rejected by the majority. I guess it worked because he did eventually get married. I often tell people, "If you have two men who both want to have a date on Saturday night and one man asks 10 women out and one man asks one woman, which man is more likely to have a date on Saturday night and which man is likely to have more rejections?" Obviously, the answer is the same man, the one who asked 10 women out. This is an example of how rejection may be a good thing because taking the risk of rejection leads to potential success. In conclusion, what we have reviewed is that people's early experiences in life may lead to increased sensitivity to rejection. This rejection sensitivity often leads to misinterpretations of others' behavior and irrational jealousy leading to problematic relationship behaviors by the rejection-sensitive person. These behaviors may cause dissatisfaction and termination of the relationship reinforcing the irrational thinking about the likelihood of rejection. However, there are methods that can be used to reduce rejection sensitivity. References Downey G. and Feldman, S. (1996). Implications of Rejection Sensitivity for Intimate Relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1327-1343. Erikson, Erik H. Identity and the Life Cycle. New York: International Universities Press, 1959. Feldman, S. and Downey, G. (1994). Rejection sensitivity as a mediator of the impact of childhood exposure to family violence on adult attachment behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 231-247. Copyright 2009 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Personality Testing in Sports: Should We or Shouldn't We? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "If sports teams found that athletes with serious mental disorders, drug problems, or criminal tendencies are a detriment to the team, they may find that using personality testing...can be helpful." Tweet Personality testing has been used for many decades by industrial/organizational (I/O) psychologists to select appropriate candidates to fill certain job positions. In particular, police departments and fire departments often require personality testing of applicants. Even many seminaries require testing of students desiring to become ministers or priests. More recently, some professional sports teams are using personality testing to help select from the draft choices. Is this a good idea and what kind of problems can we expect in this process? The history of personality testing for job applicants and students has been rife with controversy due to the many problems inherent in the process of personality testing. We can expect many of the same problems to occur when sport professionals use personality testing to select athletes. Such problems that generally occur in using personality testing in the selection process include the difficulty of defining personality variables, issues relating to the validity of tests and lack of predictive research, and the number of incorrect predictions. In addition, selection of athletes may involve other issues including the use of tests designed for other purposes, the application of the Profile of Mood States and the iceberg profile to personality, the importance of personality testing relative to physical skills, and increased predictive validity problems. Prior to using personality testing for selection purposes, we need to be aware of what we mean by personality and how it relates to performance. Generally, personality is considered traits or characteristics that describe an individual which are not readily changeable. Therefore, sadness is considered a mood state that is temporary whereas negativity may be seen as a personality characteristic. One major problem with the definition of personality is the idea that it is unchangeable because many of the descriptors we use to describe others are often quite changeable; even the example of negativity used previously can be changed either due to circumstances or effort. Given the difficulty in developing an agreed upon definition of personality, it is even more difficult to measure the construct of personality since measurement requires operational, or concrete, definitions. This leads to problems with test validity. To understand the problems the validity problems in using personality testing for selection, it is important to understand the nature of validity and, in particular, its application to personality assessment. Validity is whether a test is measuring what it intends to measure. For instance, honesty tests are frequently used in personnel selection; however, sometimes these tests may measure something other than honesty such as a persons ability to decipher the appropriate responses to an honesty test which is actually a type of deception. To determine whether a test is measuring what it purports to measure, research must be conducted comparing the test to other variables such as behavior and future performance. The predictive studies in which a test is given and then performance is examined at a later time are the most important studies for using tests in selection. However, these studies are less frequently undertaken due to the time and expense involved. A major practical problem with test validity is that tests with low predictive validity will have a significant number of false positives and false negatives. This means that numerous capable performers will not be identified and that individuals who should not have been selected will be selected. In the area of I/O psychology there has been significant problems with the tests being racially biased because the tests were developed on a primarily Caucasian population and those minorities were disproportionately not selected on the basis of the tests. All the above problems and more exist with using personality testing to select among draft choices in sports. First of all, most personality tests were developed on other populations and have been co-opted by sports professionals. Therefore, there are increased validity problems when these tests are used on athletes. In particular, the Profile of Mood States has been extensively used in sport psychology. However, even as the name of the test suggests, it is not a personality test but a test of a temporary emotional state of being. Since it is capable of changing rapidly, it is not a good predictor of future performance although it may be able to classify present performing capability. Although successful athletes generally score higher on the Vigor subscale and lower on the other scales of Tension, Depression, Anger, Fatigue, and Confusion, it is possible that their profile changed because of their career rather than the profile causing the success. Research is not clearly determining the direction of causality in this area since most of it is correlational. Due to the lack of predictive research, any attempts to use the personality tests and other tests for selecting athletes has great potential for being inaccurate. Another problem with validity of these tests for selecting athletes is the issue of truncated range which is that when dealing with an elite population, a tests predictive validity decreases because the members of the population are so similar to one another and it is difficult to discriminate the minute differences. Given all the above problems, it may be possible to use personality testing in a very limited way with the selection process of athletes. Police and fire departments and seminary programs have found personality testing that assesses dysfunctional personality and the presence of mental disorders can be useful in weeding out inappropriate candidates. Generally, the validity of personality tests for this purpose is stronger and does not tend to falsely identify many individuals as dysfunctional although it may inaccurately classify individuals as healthy. For this reason it is important that testing be conducted by a psychologist and include more than one test and an interview. If sports teams found that athletes with serious mental disorders, drug problems, or criminal tendencies are a detriment to the team, they may find that using personality testing in this manner can be helpful. However, otherwise, personality testing may create more problems than it solves. Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. The Mood Log can be found in Excel At Life's CBT Tools for Healthy Living app. Tweet What triggers my stress? When am I not as depressed? Do certain foods make my pain worse? Are my headaches associated with certain places or people? Are my moods worse during my menstrual cycle? Is my treatment effective? Is my athletic performance enhanced by certain moods? All these questions and more can be answered by the Mood Log feature in Excel At Life's CBT Tools for Healthy Living app. It has been updated to include a variety of new tools. Although these new features increase the potential for your desired results, they also bring additional complexity. Sometimes it can be difficult to know how to use the app to best suit your situation. A previous article I wrote, I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where Do I Start? addresses simple ways to begin using CBT. To help you use the app more effectively I want to give you tips on using a new feature that I'm excited to provide as it can be so useful in many different ways. The Mood Log feature of the app not only gives you a place to record your daily moods but it will provide an analysis of how different activities or events can impact your moods. Not only that, but as the mood logs are fully customizable you can use the logs to track not only moods but symptoms and events to determine what are the contributors to your moods and symptoms. The following provides examples of how you can use the mood logs. Recall vs. Daily Mood Log A well-known research fact is that recall of symptoms, mood, pain and associated events is poor and biased. We usually think our recall is accurate but when compared to a diary or reports from others we are often mistaken. And worse, our recall is influenced by current mood (Schraedley et al., 2002). For instance, in my clinical practice I gave clients a form to complete prior to every session which included mood ratings. Sometimes clients would say Nothing ever seems to help. I never feel better. If I disagreed, they argued, But that's the way it feels! I explained to them that even though it feels that way at the moment it is not true. Then, I would take out their prior mood ratings and show them how much better they felt in the past and what was associated with their moods such as You were more socially involved last month and your mood was much better. Being able to see for themselves how their mood varied helped my clients to be more hopeful and to continue making positive changes. The more you understand about what triggers your moods and symptoms, the more potential control you can have. The Mood Log can provide you (and your therapist) with valuable information. The Mood Log lets you use facts to fill in the blanks rather than making them up. We often believe something when we have no evidence because it was something we were told or it happened once before. For example, many people believe comfort food helps them to feel better. However, research (Wagner, H., et al., 2014) shows that the concept of comfort food is a myththat moods are not different after eating comfort foods than after eating other enjoyable foods or not eating at all. Why is Excel At Life's Mood Log Better than Simply Recording Moods? Many mood trackers are available. But that is all they do. You can see how your moods fluctuate but unless you are good at finding patterns (without recall bias) it is difficult to know the triggers or associated events. The Mood Log allows you to record your moods in 15 minute intervals throughout the day. Moods can fluctuate considerably with different activities so a simple once a day mood tracker is not enough to help you understand the changes in your mood. The Mood Log lets you rate moods or symptoms (or anything that occurs frequently and can be assessed on a 10 point scale). In addition, you can select actions, activities, or events that were occurring at the same time. The analysis feature of the app will tell you which moods occurred with these actions and the average rating for each mood. Don't worryI know this is pretty abstract right now but I will give you plenty of examples as you read on. As the analysis feature is customizable, it is only limited by your imagination. The other feature that is unique about the Mood Log is that it is fully customizable: 1) Choose moods or symptoms to track. Although the Mood Log provides a list of basic moods, you can also add any moods you want to track. But you're not limited to moods. You can track symptoms such as headaches, back pain, nausea, etc. 2) Create your own high/low labels. The moods or symptoms or assessed on a 10 point scale from low to high. However, if some other label makes more sense for what you are trying to track, you can change the label. For example, if you want to track hunger you could label it starving to stuffed. 3) Choose actions, activities, or events. The Mood Log comes with a list of actions from which you can select such as working, eating, exercising, attending class, etc. However, you can include your own. If you suspect that certain events such as socializing with a certain friend or eating specific foods are contributing to a negative mood you could track those events. An Important Note to Most Effectively Use the Analysis Feature The analysis can only be as accurate as the data. For the most effective use of this feature, the following is necessary: 1) Lots of ratings. When using averages, the accuracy increases with the more data that is available. For instance, if you want to know the average household income in your community, asking two people for their information can lead to a wildly different outcome than asking thirty people. Generally, having thirty or more ratings will provide you with more accurate information. 2) Consistent ratings. The closer you are to keeping daily ratings the more accurate your analysis will be. For instance, if you tend to only rate yourself when you are feeling bad you might not be able to analyze the effects of different situations on a negative mood because you don't have a comparison. 3) Define the ratings clearly. Be sure you have clearly specified what your ratings mean. For instance, if you are rating your pain level, have a good understanding what the difference is between a 5 or an 8 so that you can be uniform in your ratings. These ratings don't have to conform to anyone else's rating but need to make sense for you. Determine What Impacts Your Moods When you determine that certain actions or events impact your moods, you are then able to do something to change the situation. As a psychologist, I often viewed my role as a detectivethe more that I could observe patterns in my clients moods, symptoms, and behavior, the more I was able to help them pursue changes that were more likely to lead to desired outcomes. Examples: 1) What triggers my stress? The triggers for stress can be quite different for different people. In fact, what is stressful for one person may be pleasurable for another. A classic example is that an extrovert may enjoy being the center of attention whereas an introvert may find the same situation very stressful. The Mood Log helps you to identify situations that may trigger your stress. To use the Mood Log for this purpose, make a list of situations that might be triggering your stress and add them to the list of activities in the Mood Log. Add stress to your list of moods. Recording your stress level over time and your activities or actions will allow you to see in the Analyze section of the Mood Log what your average level of stress is for each activity. 2) When am I not as depressed? People with depression typically view their life through the lens of the depression. As a result, when they are depressed they have little memory of happy times or enjoyable events. Such a distortion tends to make the depression worse as it increases discouragement and hopelessness. Treatment has often been focused on getting people with depression to engage in enjoyable activities because research has shown that it helps with depression. The difficulty with this method is those with depression typically anticipate that activities will not be pleasurable (Sherdell, et al., 2012). Nothing is ever enjoyable! Yet, keeping daily logs has often shown that this belief is negatively biased. When someone with depression engages in a normally enjoyable activity and is asked during the activity if it is enjoyable, they often report that it is. Recording in the Mood Log consistently can help you identify situations that are enjoyable so you can engage in those activities more. As you engage in activities list them in the Mood Log and rate how pleasurable they are. The closer you rate the activity to the time you are actually engaged will allow a more accurate analysis. This method often allows those with depression to see that their mood does fluctuate with different activities and they do experience enjoyment. Analyze the Contributors to Physical Symptoms It has been known for a long time that reporting of physical symptoms is affected by what is known as a recall bias (Howren & Suls, 2011). For instance, someone's memory of pain is impacted by their current pain level. In other words, if your current pain is severe you are more likely to report that the pain was severe in the past. As a result, people's reporting of past pain is frequently inaccurate (Eich et al., 1985). The Mood Log can help you see associations between your symptoms and certain situations. By keeping a daily log you are less likely to be influenced by recall bias. Examples: 1) Are my headaches associated with certain places or people? The Mood Log can help you determine if places or people may be contributing to your headaches. You can customize the actions list in the Mood Log with as many events, places, or people that you wish. Also, you can customize the mood section to include headaches. Then when you have a headache, select from the action list the event or the people present and rate your headache. The Analyze section will provide your average rating for the selected events or people. Another tip is to rate when you don't have a headache to see if not having a headache may be associated with certain actions, events, or people. By doing so you can increase actions or behaviors that improve your pain. 2) Do certain foods make my pain worse? Many people find that certain foods or additives can increase physical symptoms such as pain. You can use the Mood Log to track problem foods. To do so, add pain to your mood list and add potential problem foods to the action list. Over time, you will be able to discern a pattern by using the Analyze section and seeing the average ratings of your pain with certain foods/additives. Track Events Often there are certain events that you might like to track to see how they correlate with your moods. The Mood Log can easily be customized to be used in that way. Examples: 1) Are my moods worse during my period? Although many women believe their moods are worse at certain times of their menstrual cycle, this belief may or may not be accurate. By keeping the Mood Log consistently you will be able to see how your moods may vary. The best way to do this is to create a system in the action list for monitoring your cycle. There are different ways this could be done. For instance, you could add not menstruating, premenstrual, and menstruating to the action list or you could measure it by each week. 2) Is my athletic performance enhanced by certain moods? Athletic performance can be affected by moods. How moods affect performance can vary for each individual, however. Some people may have improved performance with a high degree of relaxation whereas others might do better with a high level of anger. The Mood Log allows you to see what mood state might work best for your performance. To analyze performance first add the activity to the action list. Then rate your moods whenever you engage in that activity. The analyze feature will show your averages for each mood you rate. Treatment The Mood Log has unlimited potential as an aid to therapy. Examples: 1) Is my treatment effective? The Mood Log can be useful for measuring treatment methods for depression, anxiety or even physical problems. Your therapist can help you to determine ways to do this for the different methods in your therapy. For example, if you have an anxiety disorder and are learning to use relaxation methods you can put relaxation in your action list and record your anxiety level. Or, if you are switching antidepressants, you can put the different medications in your action list and add them to your mood ratings. This Mood Log allows you to go back to prior entries and add actions. So, for instance, if you have been recording moods but didn't have the medication added to your ratings you can add it to prior entries. 2) Are my treatment exposures reducing my anxiety? If you are doing exposures in your therapy you can use the Analyze feature to see how your average anxiety level changes over time. Add anxiety to the mood log and add the exposure to the action list. The Analyze feature allows you to see how your anxiety level is different from the present to the past week, month or year. In addition, the 15 minute option of recording mood levels can be useful to see how your anxiety level reduces during an exposure session. To view, tap the Daily for anxiety. Using the Graph Feature To make the Mood Log even more effective, the graph feature allows you to view different moods and actions together. This allows you to analyze patterns based on multiple actions. For instance, you can see how your mood varies when you are doing something alone or with someone. To examine these types of patterns you need to select more than one action when you record your moods. Example: select "walking" when you are alone or select "walking" and "visiting a friend" when you are with someone. Remember, you can customize this list so that you could put specific friend's names in the list so as to compare "walking" with one friend and "walking" with another. The more you customize your mood log, the more effective it can be with helping you to understand your moods. In addition, since you can customize the mood list to include symptoms you can examine symptoms on the graph based on certain actions. For instance, if you record your pain levels and select from the action list, you can see how your pain varies with different actions or combinations of actions. Perhaps, "walking" alone is associated with an increase in pain while "walking" with a "friend" is associated with a decrease in pain. This would tell you that having a distraction can reduce your experience of pain. How this mood and symptom log can be used to understand patterns is limited only by your inventiveness when customizing. The more you record in it the more it can help you understand yourself so as to make effective changes in your life. References Eich, E., Reeves, J. L., Jaeger, B., & Graff-Radford, S. B. (1985). Memory for pain: relation between past and present pain intensity.Pain,23(4), 375-380. Howren, M. B., & Suls, J. (2011). The symptom perception hypothesis revised: Depression and anxiety play different roles in concurrent and retrospective physical symptom reporting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100(1), 182195. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021715 Sherdell, L., Waugh, C. E., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Anticipatory pleasure predicts motivation for reward in major depression.Journal of abnormal psychology,121(1), 5160. https://doi:10.1037/a0024945 Schraedley, P., Turner, R., & Gotlib, I. (2002). Stability of Retrospective Reports in Depression: Traumatic Events, Past Depressive Episodes, and Parental Psychopathology.Journal of Health and Social Behavior,43(3), 307-316. Wagner, H. S., Ahlstrom, B., Redden, J. P., Vickers, Z., & Mann, T. (2014). The myth of comfort food. Health Psychology, 33(12), 15521557. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000068 Copyright 2020 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Resolving Conflict How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Bullying at work can often be so subtle that it is difficult to report without appearing to be overly sensitive or petty. Most people are not overtly bullied with physical attacks or threats of violence because these behaviors can be easily identified and reported. Instead, most bullying at work is a passive-aggressive type that is usually a combination of subtle behaviors that the perpetrator can easily deny as being misunderstood. Some examples: 1) Withholding. A co-worker doesn't provide you with necessary information for a task and your performance is affected. The co-worker can claim they didn't realize you didn't have the information. 2) Excessive oversight. Your boss monitors your work constantly, questioning everything that you do. Your boss can claim that is his/her management style or that s/he was concerned about the project and your performance. Read more... 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People The most difficult social conflict usually involves passive-aggressive (PA) behavior. The reason it is more distressing than even aggressive behavior is because it causes the recipient to be doubtful of him or her self. When someone is aggressive towards you, their intention is clear and it is easier to make a decision such as I need to steer clear of this person or I need to report this behavior. However, the purpose of passive-aggressive behavior is for the aggressor to avoid responsibility for their actions. PA behavior can easily be denied or blame shifted: I didn't mean it the way you took it or You're being too sensitive or You're just trying to get me in trouble. As a result, PA behavior cannot be addressed in the same way you might handle aggressive behavior. When managing PA people you need to be aware of the underlying purpose of the behavior so that you can respond in a way that prevents them from succeeding at their agenda. The less likely they are to achieve their goal, the more likely you will see a reduction in their behavior. Rules When Dealing With Passive-aggressive People The following rules provide some guidelines to managing PA people. As you read these rules it may seem impossible to develop an appropriate response on the spur of the moment when confronted with PA behavior because there are so many things to consider. However, much of the time certain people in your life probably engage in repeated PA behavior which gives you the opportunity to prepare in advance. Once you have practiced the skills in predictable situations, you will be better able to manage the less predictable ones. Read more... I'm sure you've dealt with individuals who have caused you to be so frustrated that afterwards you scratch your head asking "Am I crazy?" Most likely you just had an encounter with a passive-aggressive person. Such encounters may include sarcasm, shifting blame, saying one thing while meaning another to name a few. For instance, I used to know a co-worker who was very skilled at giving back-handed compliments such as "You look great! You must be doing something different" as well as sarcasm disguised as a compliment "Oh, I hear you've managed to pull off another miracle." The problem with these kinds of comments is that if you try to confront them about the insult, you will be accused of not understanding, "I didn't mean it that way" or of misinterpreting, "You must have a problem to think that. I was just trying to compliment you. Sorry I didn't word it right to suit you." As a result, you end up looking like the bad guy, feeling frustrated, and asking yourself, "Am I crazy?" And the other person walks away blameless. Read more... PsychNotes How Moral Identity Influences Witnesses' Reactions to Abusive Supervisors Conflict Resolution: What if You Considered Other People's Views? Blame as a Way of Feeling in Control Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Making an Assertive Complaint Forgiveness Isn't Always a Virtue When to Criticize Your Partner Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present Laugh in the Face of Adversity: Reducing Stress During Marital Conflict Is Rage Worth the Physical Suffering? Marital Conflict: When Bad is Good and When It's Bad Steps to Reduce Holiday Stress When Encountering Family Demands Do You Understand Me? Conflict in Relationships Toxic Parents: Mean or Emotionally Distressed? I've Been There Doesn't Always Mean I Support You Successful Marriages Require Emotional Control Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Don't Be Too Unselfish in a Group--You Might Be Removed What to Do When Anger Hurts Those You Love Cindy knew that she should back off and not say anything. But she was angry about her husband's criticism. He was always telling her what to do and she was tired of him disrespecting her. She was quite capable of solving problems herself but he was so controlling. She believed that he didn't care if he hurt her but only that she did what he wanted. As a result, she wanted to lash back at him and hurt him. Another part of her, however, knew that she was over-reacting and that he was just trying to help. Yet, her anger won out and she started yelling at him about trying to control her! This escalated into an argument and avoidance of one another the rest of the day. Bruce had a stressful day at work. He was concerned about a project he was handling and that he needed to complete it in a timely manner because his promotion might depend on it. Yet, no matter what he did, everything seemed to go wrong. When he came home from work, his daughter and son were excited to see him and started clamoring for his attention. He tried to look at their drawings and answer their questions but they just wanted more and more from him. Finally, in frustration, he yelled at them to shut up! The children started crying and his wife became angry with him. As these examples show, anger often hurts the ones we love. Neither Cindy nor Bruce wanted to lash out at their loved ones but they couldn't control their reaction. Many people who have problems with anger regret their actions but they continue to hurt those they love. They often make promise after broken promise to themselves to stop the angry outbursts. Yet, again and again, they vent anger against the ones they love. Why Is Anger Difficult to Control? The process of releasing frustration through yelling at someone, throwing or hitting something, and other physical methods is a powerful reinforcer. When you engage in these behaviors you release pent-up energy which is the adrenaline that has built up in your system due to stress. This process may involve the depletion of the glycogen (glucose) stores in your system and the release of endorphins in your brain. What does this mean? And what does it have to do with reinforcing yelling and other non-productive releases of anger?Read more... Betrayal is probably the most devastating loss a person can experience. To be betrayed, the person must first experiencetrust in the betrayer. It is fairly impossible for you to be betrayed if you did not trust the individual in the first place. Therefore, the definition of betrayal involves the act of someone violating your trust in them. The betrayal I am discussing in this article refers to a variety of forms of betrayal. For instance, a child is betrayed when he or she is abused by the parents who are supposed to love, support, and protect the child. A spouse is betrayed when their partner has an affair. Betrayal is when someone you trust lies to you, cheats on you, abuses you, or hurts you by putting their own self-interest first. Read more... One rarely sees David and Susan more than a few feet from each other at work. The thought of Susan increases Davids heart rate, while Susans thoughts do likewise every time David is near. The way they look into one anothers eyes tells their co-workers, You dont really belong here. Even their boss feels a bit awkward when the heat between them borders on the inappropriate. A passionate relationship beginning to bloom? No. David and Susan are two co-workers locked in what seems to be an incurable conflict at work. Their situation illustrates how conflict can affect us at our job. Conflict may not only take a toll on our physical body (as it did on Davids racing heart), but it often occupies our thoughts and causes us a great deal of emotional distress. As we saw in the situation with David and Susan, conflictual behavior impacts not only those involved in the conflict, but also those who have no part in it. As most of us spend approximately one-third of our adult lives in the workplace, conflict in this setting cant be easily dismissed as unimportant. In fact, failing to address such conflict may have implications for our non-working lives. As a result, it becomes important for each of us to understand how conflict arises in the workplace, and what steps we can take to deal with such conflict. Read more... If women could just change one thing, they would find that they could have almost everything they want in a relationship. Of course, I'm talking about women who are married to the average decent non-abusive man. I don't know how often I've heard a woman say, "But I shouldn't have to ask." Frequently, they have all sorts of expectations of their partner and become resentful and angry when he doesn't fulfill those expectations. However, when I ask what he said when they asked for what they wanted, they either respond with "I shouldn't have to ask" or with "I told him once. I shouldn't have to keep telling him." These attitudes are self-defeating and often destructive to a relationship. If women could learn to ask for what they want and ask often, many women could have the relationship of their dreams. When I tell women this, then they typically respond, "But he'll think I'm nagging him." The problem with this thinking is that women don't understand how men communicate. Read more... Holidays are often a joyous reunion for many families--a time of happy memories, a time of sharing, a time of renewing ties. Many people look forward to the holiday season with excited anticipation. However, many people look forward to the holiday season with trepidation. Often, holidays are stressful times because problems within families that can be ignored from a distance become readily apparent with the close contact of family gatherings. What is supposed to be a pleasant time becomes a nightmare. Read more... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Breaking Up is Hard to Do: Ending a Bad Relationship by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet "...imagine if someone ignores the pain and therefore couldn't learn that lesson. They would repeatedly touch the hot stove thinking that 'This time it will be different.' As a result, they experience the pain again and again while wondering how unfortunate they are to keep touching hot stoves: 'I'm so unlucky--I keep getting burned!'" Frequently over the years of my practice I've had new clients who recently left bad relationships and want to prevent a recurrence of the same scenario. However, two common obstacles too often occur, both of which are related to difficulty handling grief and loss. The first obstacle is related to finalizing the relationship. Often, although the relationship is over, there is a period of returning to the former partner and leaving the relationship again and again until they are finally convinced that the partner won't change. The second obstacle is when meeting a new person and seeing the "red flags" they are in denial of the message of those red flags. They ignore the warning signals due to a desperate need to be in a relationship. More important to them is the need to be wanted that the need to be in a healthy relationship. How Are These Obstacles Related to Problems in the Grief Process? As I see it, both of these situations are due to an avoidance of the pain of grief. Grief feels horrible! It is NOT something anyone WANTS to experience. However, it is a necessary process for healing, learning, and making better choices in life. The avoidance of the pain of grief thwarts this process and interferes with becoming involved in healthier relationships in the future. Emotions contain important information about the world and our experience with it. Paying attention to emotions allows us to process an experience and make better decisions in the future. Avoidance of those emotions prevents us from learning from the event. For instance, what is a "red flag" anyway? Typically, it is an emotional warning system. When a person ignores the emotional warning and creates excuses, this blocks awareness of the message and prevents healthy and accurate decision-making. Why Do People Ignore This Warning System? People don't want to feel bad. It is uncomfortable, if not downright painful, to examine previous decisions especially those that turned out to be serious mistakes. Therefore, people tend to avoid that emotional process. Yet, it is similar to learning not to touch a hot stove. When you touch a hot stove and burn your hand, it not only is an immediate warning to remove your hand, but is is also a lesson to be more careful around stoves. Not only that but the lesson can generalize so that you learn it is wise to be careful around any hot object or fire. Heat, flame, or red coils become "red flags" to avoid. See how processing the pain signals allow for better choices in the future? However, imagine if someone ignores the pain and therefore couldn't learn that lesson. They would repeatedly touch the hot stove thinking that "This time it will be different." As a result, they experience the pain again and again while wondering how unfortunate they are to keep touching hot stoves: "I'm so unlucky--I keep getting burned!" Emotional pain is protective just as physical pain is a warning signal. We need to learn to listen to the message of the emotional pain to aid in future situations. However, if we avoid emotional pain, we can never receive the protective message and we are likely to be doomed to repeat the same mistakes. Either that or people develop extreme avoidance of situations so they don't have to feel bad: "I'll never fall in love again!" What Does This Have to Do With Returning Repeatedly to a Bad Relationship? The process I have observed in my practice is that the individual will initially be buoyed by the grief process. An early stage of grief is the anger stage. So at first, the individual will be angry about how they were treated. Anger can feel good because the pain and blame is focused outwardly on the other person and their misbehavior. However, after awhile the grieving person will move into the sadness stage of grief in which they will be more likely to question their decision. Sadness is more personally directed and the sadness of grief feels never-ending. From my experience, this is the stage in which the person is likely to return to a bad situation or relationship due to their belief that they are unable to tolerate the overwhelming sadness. In fact, frequently they will convince themselves "I must not really want to leave because I should be happy rather than sad. In other words, they misinterpret the message of sadness when grieving the loss of a relationship. They believe the sadness is a sign of the intensity of their emotions and that they should remain in the relationship. What they don't recognize is that feeling sad is a normal part of the grieving process even when leaving a bad relationship. Just because someone feels sad when ending a relationship doesn't mean that the relationship was good. For instance, the grief can be due to the loss of the ILLUSION of the perfect relationship. People frequently create in their minds the relationship they desire to perceive and ignore all the information to the contrary until they can no longer avoid the reality. In these circumstances, when they end the relationship, they are actually grieving the loss of the illusion they had created, not the loss of the actual relationship. In addition, most relationships are not all bad, so even if the partner's behavior is no longer tolerable, the good qualities may still be missed. In such cases, the grief is due to the loss of the good aspects of the relationship. Sometimes people find it hard to let go because these good qualities remind them of what "could" be and they are drawn back into an attempt to change the relationship to be what they fantasize it could be. How Does the Avoidance of Grief Cause Repeated Bad Relationships? As stated previously, the purpose of grief is to not only help us heal but to help us recognize emotional warning signs. When a person so desperately wants to feel good that they suppress the negative emotions, they prevent the warning system from operating properly. I repeatedly hear in my practice "I'm sure this is a red flag, but..." The "but" is their method of ignoring the red flag and is deceptive because it appears they are recognizing the red flag and evaluating it when, in fact, they are readily dismissing it. Some of the common ways of ignoring or dismissing the red flag are: 1) "It will be different this time." 2) "How can I be sure? Maybe I'm not giving him/her a chance." 3) "Maybe I'm just being overly sensitive because of my last experience." 4) "We talked about it and he/she assured me it wouldn't be the same." One thing I see in particular when someone dismisses a red flag is the tendency to look only at the surface behavior and not at the underlying dynamics. For instance, someone who had been married to a controlling, jealous alcoholic may believe the new relationship will be different because the new person doesn't drink. However, by attributing everything to the alcoholism they ignore the red flags regarding the dynamics of controlling, jealous behavior that also exists in the new relationship. If the individual fully understands this dynamic, he/she may be able to recognize it in a new relationship and not dismiss it so easily. However, to fully understand and recognize the signs, it is necessary to fully explore the dynamics. Such exploration requires having to examine and assess the unpleasant, or even traumatic, events that occurred and such a process can often be painful. As stated earlier, people generally want to avoid this process. How Can I Make Better Choices? The more you allow yourself to fully process the emotions that occur with your grief, you are likely to make better decisions. Processing the emotions may vary depending upon the stage of grief you are in. 1) Denial Stage. During this stage a person is likely to believe that the partner will change. As a result, they will be swayed by promises. However, promises aren't likely to result in behavior change. Therefore, it is important to wait for a sign of TRUE behavior change. However, surface behavior change is not enough. For instance, the partner may stop drinking but that doesn't necessarily indicate true change. They may still not be addressing the underlying problems, in which case the problems are likely to eventually resurface. True behavior change usually requires some in-depth examination of the self and addressing some uncomfortable emotions. This may need to be done with a therapist or a self-help group, but you need to be assured that the partner has changed at a deeper level. Otherwise, the same problems will occur in the relationship. 2) Anger Stage. When you are in the anger stage of grief, it is often helpful to write down your emotions and why you are feeling them. This gives you a record of your decision to leave the relationship. Later on during the sadness stage it can help remind you of why you left the relationship and why it is not healthy for you. During this stage do not send angry emails or texts to the ex. The problem with this method of releasing anger is that it is likely to backfire making you look like the "crazy one" which could make you question your decision later on. However, you do need ways to release the anger. Writing in a journal can be a release. Although talking to a friend can be a release, it can also create problems especially if you do return to the relationship. Sometimes you may need a physical release. This is perfectly okay but find a release that doesn't hurt you such as punching a bag, hitting a pillow with a bat, or running. 3) Sadness Stage. This stage is particularly difficult because you need to let yourself fully feel the sadness. Even though this stage feels bad, keep in mind that it WILL end--you won't feel this way forever. However, you do want to challenge any irrational beliefs you may have at this stage or else you are likely to return to the relationship for the purpose of avoiding the emotions. For instance, recognize that the sadness is due to the relationship not working out rather than meaning that you desire to stay in the relationship. Use the writing that you did in the anger stage to remind you of why you don't want to return to the relationship. The grief process tends to be time-limited if you fully allow the emotions. However, every time you return to the relationship and leave again, the grief process starts over. In other words, you are making it more difficult for yourself if you avoid the sadness by returning to the relationship. If you are leaving a relationship that is truly bad, the eventual outcome is likely to be that you will leave. The best way to shorten the pain of breaking up is to not return to the relationship. However, I always tell clients that and have yet to see someone do that. I have come to believe that the leaving and returning is the way that people who are in dysfunctional relationships and are fearful of the grief process are eventually able to leave a bad relationship. However, this does not bode well for developing a future healthy relationship because it is an avoidance of the protective emotional messages contained in the grief process. How do you make better choices and create better relationships? Let yourself fully feel no matter how painful it is and listen to the message. As stated previously, pain is protectiveit is meant to warn you and help you. Don't avoid the message it contains. Copyright 2013 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Sport & Exercise Psychology Although sports psychology is still in its infancy, a tremendous amount of interest has been generated by the potential of psychological principles to enhance athletic performance. In particular, the dedication to empirical examination of the tenets of cognitive-behavioral theoryhas led to more effective clinical techniques which have been intuitively appealing to sport psychology consultants. As a result, psychological methods were implemented to enhance performance prior to solid research support. However, recent reviews of studies conducted in the last approximately fifteen years have shown the psychological methods to be useful in the area of sports performance enhancement (Greenspan & Feltz, 1989; Weinberg and Comar, 1994). Much of the research in this area has focused on individual sports or individual skills for team sports as that allows for better experimental designs. As the research base has grown, it has become possible to select particular sports, especially those that are individually based, and examine the literature for the factors that influence performance. A number of studies have specifically focused on enhancing performance in the martial arts as the martial arts are conducive to empirical study given their nature and the reasons that individuals participate in the martial arts. READ MORE... Although we may prefer to believe that learning a motor skill is purely learning a set of physical techniques, we have to consider that most learning typically takes place in the context of an interpersonal relationship with a teacher. The critical question is how does this interaction affect the development of motor skills. It appears that the mediating factor between the presentation of the instructions by the teacher and the performance of the skill by the student may be the cognitive process of self-efficacy (Escarti & Guzman, 1999). Some may argue that the development of effective skills may lead to the increased self-efficacy demonstrated by students of high ability. Although this process occurs, it is not sufficient for explaining the role of developing self-efficacy and its impact on learning motor skills. To fully explain the role of self-efficacy, we must evaluate the interpersonal context of how the teacher or coach provides feedback to the athlete, how that feedback affects self-efficacy, and how self-efficacy enhances performance. Unfortunately, studies directly examining this relationship are sparse, and therefore, the inferences need to be made based on research examining the relation of the different components of the equation such as the feedback/self-efficacy relationship and the self-efficacy/motor skills relationship. READ MORE... Although martial arts derive from the eastern philosophical thinking which focuses on the importance of the combined interaction of the mind and body, many western martial artists tend to ignore the mental aspects of the art and only focus on the physical aspects. Interestingly, other sports that were not so grounded in the metaphysical traditions seem to have more easily accepted the precepts of sport psychology and embraced the development of mental skills. It seems that more and more frequently, whenever a sporting event is on television, references are made to sport psychologists assisting the athletes. Top athletes in most sports are turning to sport psychologists to enhance their performance because the development of the mental skills has been shown to give an edge to those athletes.READ MORE... Personality testing has been used for many decades by industrial/organizational (I/O) psychologists to select appropriate candidates to fill certain job positions. In particular, police departments and fire departments often require personality testing of applicants. Even many seminaries require testing of students desiring to become ministers or priests. More recently, some professional sports teams are using personality testing to help select from the draft choices. Is this a good idea and what kind of problems can we expect in this process? READ MORE... Without confidence in ones ability, an individual cannot perform to his or her potential. It is even possible that someone with lesser ability, but with confidence, can outperform this person because belief in oneself can be a powerful influence. What is this sense of confidence? Albert Bandura refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity. The concept of self-efficacy has often been used interchangeably with the concept of self-esteem which is the process of evaluating the self; however, self-efficacy is more accurately described as a precursor to self-esteem and is mediated by the individuals self-attributions. READ MORE... Low self-esteem has been implicated in most psychological dysfunction; however, low self-esteem is not necessarily the root cause of this dysfunction. It is believed (Aro, 1994) that individuals with high self-esteem who may be predisposed to psychological disorders are better equipped to cope with those disorders, and thus, reduce the negative consequences that may result. Therefore, if self-esteem can be enhanced, the psychological consequences of disorders can be reduced. This process can be illustrated by describing a similar process that occurs with physical illness such as diabetes. The individual may be genetically predisposed to developing the illness, but if they engage in the proper healthy care-taking activities, they may prevent the development of the illness or, at least, reduce its consequences (Amir et. al., 1990. The enhancement of self-esteem and self-efficacy can be an important contributing factor to both the prevention of psychological and physical illness and the maintenance of health. READ MORE... Training smart is more important than the amount of daily practice. Too often an athlete believes that the more he or she practices, the more proficient he/she will become. However, this plan is not only ineffective, but it can also be detrimental to achieving the desired outcome. An athlete who practices frequently and hard without an overall plan will be more likely to suffer the effects of overtraining such as burn-out, exhaustion, and increased injuries rather than actually improving performance. By developing a set of specific goals and a plan for reaching those goals, athletes can more effectively use their practice time and even reduce the time required in practice to attain their goals. Obviously, this does not mean that the martial artist can achieve rank or win tournaments with little practice; it means that the athlete does not need to waste time through ineffective practice and through the harmful effects of overtraining. READ MORE... Frequently, people have many misconceptions about what sport psychology is and how it is applied. These misconceptions stem from making assumptions based on a limited understanding of psychology and how it is used in applied settings. In particular, misconceptions include thinking that sport psychology is for treating athletes with mental disorders or that it is simply focused on getting an athlete through a slump or that it is just fluff. There is also a great deal of confusion about the credentials of a sport psychologist primarily because there has been controversy within the field as to the appropriate credentials. READ MORE... Assessing performance and correcting errors are important internal skills for the martial arts student to develop. But how does one develop this skill? To do so, the martial arts instructor needs to consciously teach skill just as he or she teaches proper execution of a side kick or using faking techniques during sparring. However, teaching the development of using internal sources of information for feedback may be something many martial arts instructors were not taught themselves. So often when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence. READ MORE... The manner in which instructors provide feedback to athletes can have significant impact upon an athlete's self-efficacy which in turn affects the ability to learn a skill and the overall performance. Self-efficacy is the athlete's personal belief that he or she has the capability to learn and perform a specific skill or activity. The results of an interesting study by Amparo Escarti and Jose Guzman in 1999 indicated that performance feedback which focuses on providing feedback regarding technique rather than evaluating outcome was related to increased self-efficacy, a higher level of performance, and the tendency to choose more difficult tasks. Other research has shown that a higher level of self-efficacy improves performance. Thus, research shows us that how a coach provides feedback to athletes is critical in the development of the athlete. To make this issue all the more complicated, there is research evidence that women respond differently than men to feedback from coaches. This is most likely a crucial point in the martial arts today because the majority of instructors in the martial arts are men and there are more and more women choosing to participate and compete in the martial arts. Therefore, a martial arts instructor needs to be more attuned to the methods of providing feedback to women in order to elicit their best performance as well as to keep them interested in continuing their training READ MORE... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles > What Is Depression? A Frequently Misunderstood Illness by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The misunderstanding occurs because just about everyone has experienced sadness or feeling down. " Tweet How often does a depressed person hear comments such as these? Just smile. Do something and you'll feel better. If you just stop being so negative, you wouldn't feel so bad. I don't know why you're so depressed. You have everything. Some of these comments may be well-intentioned but they show a lack of understanding of the nature of depression. The problem is rooted in the use of the word depression as a diagnosis. The reason this is a problem is due to the word depression also being used by the public to describe a mood such as I'm feeling depressed today. However, a temporary mood and a diagnosable illness are two very different things. So the use of the same term to describe apples and oranges creates a great deal of confusion and misunderstanding. It certainly would make sense if we could change the name of the diagnosis to something else: XYZ Disorder that wouldn't have any other association in the public's mind. However, this was tried by the mental health profession in the past when they changed the diagnostic term manic-depression to bipolar disorder. At the same time they changed major depression to unipolar disorder but it wasn't accepted in either the public's mind or the profession's. Therefore, the best we can do at this point is to try and distinguish between the diagnosable conditions of depression and the common use of the word depression. WHY IS THIS A PROBLEM? The misunderstanding occurs because just about everyone has experienced sadness or feeling down. If the public calls this temporary mood state depression they will erroneously believe that they know what it feels like to be depressed in the clinical sense of the word. However, they will be wrong! Even though they are wrong, it won't stop them from making certain assumptions and comments that can be very detrimental to people who have a diagnosable condition. In particular, they are likely to have beliefs or even make comments such as When I was depressed, I just snapped myself out of it or Depression is just a matter of attitude. Certainly, these comments may relate to a temporary mood state, but they do not apply to the depressive disorders. Not only that, but saying these types of things to a depressed person can only serve to make them feel worse. People with clinical depression have lived with this societal attitude, and therefore, many of them believe the same thing. They frequently believe that only if they tried harder, they wouldn't feel so bad. They may believe that the depression is somehow their fault. They may believe that they are weaker than others because they can't handle the normal stresses of life that other people can. All of these beliefs are wrong! However, these critical attitudes can make the depression worse. It is difficult enough for a person to manage the depression without having the additional stress of feeling like a failure. WHY DOES IT SEEM THAT DEPRESSION IS CAUSED BY STRESS? The fact is that the depressive disorders, as is true of most of the physical disorders, are reactive to stress. This is due to the physiological impact of stress as well as the psychological impact. For instance, if a person has the common cold, their body will marshal the defenses such as producing white blood cells, adrenalin, and cortisol to fight the invading germs. When the body does this it requires additional energy and it reduces the functioning of other systems to obtain this energy. Therefore, a person will feel fatigued and will tend to be less active. This normal process serves to help the body recover. But what if the person is stressed in other ways? What if the person has chronic back pain? What if the person just lost his job? What if the person has to take care of someone else even though she's sick? Or, what if the person has a combination of additional stressors. In such a case, the body is needing to divide its resources to fight the effects of all these stressors. The problem is that we only have so much in terms of physiological resources. In addition, the psychological impact of stress is that a person finds it more difficult to do the necessary self-care. With a common cold, for example, it may be hard to obtain the necessary rest. As a result of the physiological and psychological factors, it becomes more difficult to recover from the common cold. This same process occurs with clinical depression. The more stressors in a person's life, the more difficult it becomes to recover from the depression. Therefore, many people will tend to associate the presence of these stressors as the cause of the depression. However, that is not the case. The stressors may impact the depression and make it worse or more difficult to recover, but they are not typically the cause. In fact, if a stressor is the cause, it is likely a different condition known as an adjustment disorder rather than depression which we will discuss later. What makes the picture even more confusing is that some of the suggestions at the beginning of this article that people make actually DO help. They can help because they help reduce the impact of stress. The more stress and the effects of it are reduced, the more the body can fight the depression. However, those sorts of suggestions and comments without a full understanding of clinical depression become detrimental rather than helpful because they can be seen as an attack which is just another stressor for the depressed individual. WHAT IS CLINICAL DEPRESSION? A psychiatric diagnosis can be very confusing because most diagnoses are not true disorders or illnesses but just a list of symptoms that tend to occur together. A true disorder or illness is when the cause can be identified such as a particular type of cancer being linked to specific genes. Therefore, most psychiatric diagnoses describe a group of possibly unrelated conditions or illnesses that may have different causes. Keep in mind that the descriptions of these disorders provided below may actually involve more than one illness. The three primary types of depressive disorders are major depression, dysthymic disorder, and bipolar disorder. In addition, people may suffer atypical depressions which may be associated with medical conditions, child birth, or drug/alcohol use. Finally, depression may be associated with other mental conditions such as schizoprenia. In this article, the focus is on the three primary types. 1) Major Depression. Major depression is diagnosed when an individual suffers significant symptoms that interfere with life functioning such as work, school, or daily activities of living. The symptoms must be present a minimum of two weeks. The symptoms include depressed mood, sleep disturbance, appetite disturbance, fatigue or loss of energy, feelings of restlessness or lethargy, lack of interest or pleasure in most activities, impaired concentration and ability to make decisions and feelings of worthlessness and guilt. A common symptom of major depression is suicidal ideation which involves thoughts of death, a desire for death, or the belief that others would be better off without them. Although this is a common symptom, most people with major depression do not attempt suicide for various personal or religious reasons. However, suicidal ideation is a very serious symptom of major depression. Approximately 30% of people with major depression attempt suicide and 15% commit suicide. Those who have had more than one major depression are particularly at risk. Due to the seriousness of this symptom, any suicidal ideation or talk needs to be immediately evaluated by a professional. Family and friends should not assume that it is not serious. A professional needs to evaluate it. 2) Dysthymic Disorder. While not quite as acute or debilitating as major depression, dysthymic disorder significantly interferes with the quality of a person's life. Dysthymia tends to be a low-grade but chronic condition. In other words, the symptoms are not as severe as major depression, but they tend to be always present. In fact, the diagnosis of dysthymic disorder requires that the symptoms must be present for a majority of days for at least two years. The symptoms of dysthymia are much the same as the symptoms for major depression but are not experienced to the same degree. An unfortunate consequence of dysthmia is an increased susceptibility to developing major depression. However, treatment of the dysthymic condition especially with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods decreases the risk of developing major depression. Although any suicidal ideation needs to be taken seriously, the risk of suicide for someone with dysthymic disorder does not appear to be any more than that in the general population. However, a person with double-depression which is the combination of dysthymic disorder and major depression has the same suicide risk as indicated above for those with major depression. 3) Bipolar Disorder. Bipolar disorder is a condition in which a person will alternately experience the symptoms of depression as described above with states of mania. Mania is a mood state in which the person experiences an extravagant style, grandiosity or expanded self-esteem, reduced need for sleep, excessive or pressured speech, racing thoughts and ideas, and excessive self-indulgence in risky, but enjoyable, behaviors such as sex, gambling, or business schemes. Frequently, the person in a manic state may experience psychosis in which there is no awareness of the inappropriateness or riskiness of the behaviors. Family members, co-workers, and friends may be much more concerned about the manic behavior than the individual him/herself may be. Although bipolar disorder almost always requires medication to control the symptoms, CBT can be a helpful adjunct to assist in managing the stressors that can trigger episodes. WHEN IS DEPRESSION CAUSED BY STRESS? Although the above conditions appear to be biological conditions that are caused by genetic predispositions, some people may experience temporary symptoms of depression due to stress. Such a condition is typically diagnosed as an adjustment disorder with depression or in the case of a traumatic experience may be diagnosed as an acute stress reaction. An adjustment disorder may involve the depressive symptoms but the symptoms can be traced to a single event or a period of stress in a person's life. In addition, an adjustment disorder is not likely to be recurrent unless triggered by other events or periods of stress. However, this condition should not be confused with a depressive illness which has an underlying biological cause as we understand it today. An adjustment disorder, in particular, can be very receptive to CBT methods since these methods directly impact the ability to cope with stress. In addition, practicing stress management methods and addressing daily stress is likely to be helpful in preventing the occurrence of an adjustment disorder. Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "We tend to set goals that are unreasonable, perfectionistic, and unachievable." Tweet Often people state "I'm just lazy" or "I'm unmotivated" when they are unsuccessful. Yet, most of the time, the problem isn't laziness, but lack of understanding about how to achieve goals. For instance, I believe that much of the problem the American people have with weight control is related to inability to set goals. Oh, we can set goals alright! We can set them until the cows come home. But if we don't set goals properly we are unlikely to be successful. For instance, I hear people all the time "I'm going to lose 10 pounds in the next two weeks" or "I'm going to exercise an hour a day" or "I'm going to limit myself to 1200 calories a day" or some combination of these statements in attempts to manage weight. However, even though they might achieve these goals over the short-term, any long-term change is unlikely. They will revert to old habits with resignation sighing, "I'm unmotivated. I'll never be able to lose weight." The same problem can occur in the work setting: "If only I could get organized, I would be more successful at work." Or in sports: "I just don't stick with things. I give up too easily." Again, the problem is likely to be problems with setting goals. We tend to set goals that are unreasonable, perfectionistic, and unachievable. You may question this statement, "What do you mean unachievable? I see people achieving these goals all the time." Which is true. However, most likely they achieved their goals by following some of the principles I discuss below. GOAL SETTING PRINCIPLES Dream goal First allow yourself to fully imagine what you would like to achieve. When you imagine your goal, try to imagine it as fully as possible. Allow yourself to picture what it would be like when you achieve it. What does it look like? What are the differences in your life? How will you feel? What will others see? In fact, write down what you imagine. If your goal is to start a business, imagine opening the door to your new business and looking around at what you see. If your goal is to perform well in a tournament, imagine your performance fully, what your body feels like, what you notice around you. Write these things down. 1) Realistic but challenging. However, even though this is your "dream" it needs to be within reason. For instance, it may be reasonable to lose weight and to feel healthier, but is it reasonable to "look like a supermodel?" Unless you already have the genetic makeup for it, you are setting yourself up for failure. Or, you might dream about developing your own business, but to expect that you should be as successful as Bill Gates within 10 years is unrealistic. Besides, from what I have read about Bill Gates, I don't think that is the sort of goal he set for himself. He focused upon the more immediate goal of developing a personal computer that was within the ability of most people to own. The business and financial success came later. At the same time you want to make the goal challenging. If the goal is too ridiculously easy, it won't have any meaning for you. Beyond that, you may not even achieve too easy of a goal because there is no point in it. We need some challenge for us to be motivated, but the challenge can't overwhelm us, and thereby decrease ability to follow through. One mistake people frequently make when setting goals is to set too many goals at one time as a way of making the goal challenging. However, you want to be challenged by specific, manageable goals. 2) Performance goals rather than outcome goals. The most achievable goals are personal performance goals rather than outcome-oriented goals. A goal of winning a competition, for instance, is an outcome goal. One problem with an outcome-oriented goal is that we have less control over outcome than we do over performance. For instance, another competitor may have an outstanding day or you might be suffering from a virus that diminishes performance. In addition, sometimes there are outside factors that influence outcomes such as umpires or audience behavior. Performance-oriented goals allow us to evaluate ourselves independently of these other factors. I know when I competed in martial arts, I had times when I thought I had just done my best performance in kata competition yet I didn't win, and other times I won when I thought it was a poorer performance. Therefore, I found I could maintain more consistency by evaluating myself independently of the outcome based on specific goals I set for my performance. In the work setting, an outcome-oriented goal may be a goal of obtaining a promotion or increased salary whereas a performance-oriented goal may focus on specific activities to improve the work environment or productivity. The interesting thing about this type of goal is a person may be more likely to achieve the desired outcome as well. For instance, I once had a client who had not been promoted at work in years. He felt he did a good job but he never focused on how he could improve upon his job or performance. As we discussed the situation, he showed a great deal of insight into the problems at his place of employment. We developed the goal of being assertive and communicating about the problems he observed. Within weeks of a long discussion with his supervisor about his observations, he was promoted to a supervisory position. Develop specific goals If goals are vague and unclear, they are not reachable. However, you also don't want to become discouraged by a goal that is too specific. Sometimes this may be based upon personality. One person may set a goal and if they don't achieve it in the specified time they just change the goal using what they learned from the process to improve the goal, whereas another person may set the same goal but become discouraged if they don't meet it in the specified time. Therefore, be as specific as your personality allows. For instance, it may be better in a weight loss plan to specify "I'm going to reduce the amount of sweets I eat" rather than specify a certain amount of weight to lose. 1) Long-term goals. Identify specific long-term goals. These are usually similar to the dream goal you imagined but they may be more specific. For instance, if your dream goal is to open a retail shop, your long-term goals may involve finding and renting the space, finishing the interior, purchasing the products, and hiring and training the employees. 2) Short-term goals.Once you have identified the long-term goals you can develop short-term goals to help you achieve each long-term goal. Using the retail shop example above, you may have short-term goals of researching the area where you want to open the shop to determine the competition, the availability of space, and the need or interest for your product. 3) Practice goals and competition goals. In sports and other activities involving competition, you want to develop goals for practice that will help you to meet your competition goals. For instance, I am currently training for a local stair-climb competition that raises money for the American Lung Association. My competition goal is to climb the 42 flights in less than 10 minutes this year (last year was 11:34). My practice goals involve gradually increasing the number of stairs I run in an allotted amount of time (usually 20 minutes). Set target dates For us to be able to progress in the achievement of goals, it is best to have target dates set for each goal. These target dates may need to be changed at times if you don't meet the goal, but having the date specified, preferably in writing, keeps you more focused. Develop strategies for achieving goals Once you have developed the goals, you need to create a specific, concrete plan for achieving those goals. These strategies are a specific description of what you are going to do to achieve the goals as well as to evaluate the goals. The specific strategies should include daily tasks as well as longer-term plans. If your goal is to reduce the amount of sweets you eat, what are the specific methods you will you to do that? Perhaps, you plan to write down all the sweets you eat so that you are aware of how much you eat which may, in turn, reduce the amount of sweets you consume. Or you may choose to remove sweets from your immediate vicinity so that it's more difficult to find them. Develop support network for achieving goals When I taught smoking cessation classes for the American Heart Association we instructed our classes to develop a goal with a quit date that they shared with other people they knew would be supportive. By sharing the goal, they developed a support network of people who were likely to check with them about their progress. This increased the likelihood of them quitting cigarettes. However, if your support network is critical and negative, you may find that sharing reduces motivation and success. Develop plan for goal evaluation Finally, you need a method to help you evaluate the goals you have set. The plan may keep track of progress, or it may need to determine if the strategies actually work towards accomplishing the goals, or it may need to examine what factors block the goal achievement. This part of the process becomes easier if you set measurable goals initially. The more comprehensive the evaluation, the more it allows you to modify goals or change strategies to achieve the desired outcome. One thing I always loved about behavior therapy that I tell my clients "There is no such thing as failure. There are so many different ways to achieve your goals, that each time something doesn't work it just gives us information to develop strategies that are more likely to work." Example of implementing this procedure I have the goal of developing my website. Currently, approximately 2500 people a month visit this site. My long-term goal is to attract 20,000 people a month within the next year. To achieve that goal I have developed short-term goals. One of my strategies for achieving this goal became one of my short-term goals which is to write two articles each week so that in a year I will have over 100 articles posted on this site. To write that many articles I needed to delineate particular times for me to write. I chose times during which I typically am most alert and motivated so as to increase the likelihood that I would follow the plan. Now the strategy I chose of writing two articles a week to increase traffic to my site might not work. So I've developed another short-term goal of examining Google Analytics monthly to determine if the number of visitors is increasing as the number of articles increase. If I find that the strategy doesn't work, I can then develop different goals or modify my goals and strategies for them to become more effective. I'll tell you in 2011 whether this worked. Addendum: Didn't quite make the goal by 2011, but did achieve it by 2012 by changing strategies and developing Android apps. This example demonstrates that we also need flexibility in pursuing our goals. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Self-Efficacy: The Key to Success in Sports by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity." Tweet Without confidence in ones ability, an individual cannot perform to his or her potential. It is even possible that someone with lesser ability, but with confidence, can outperform this person because belief in oneself can be a powerful influence. What is this sense of confidence? Albert Bandura refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity. The concept of self-efficacy has often been used interchangeably with the concept of self-esteem which is the process of evaluating the self; however, self-efficacy is more accurately described as a precursor to self-esteem and is mediated by the individuals self-attributions. Generally, a model for understanding self-efficacy is to consider an athlete faced with a specific situation. For instance, a baseball player is in a clinch situation: it is the bottom of the ninth with two outs, the bases are loaded, and a grand slam will win the game. Under these conditions, the batter will have thoughts about his ability to hit a home run. These thoughts, or attributions, are based on his appraisal of causality in similar situations. In particular, if the batter has hit previous home runs in tense situations, the batter will consider whether those outcomes were due to his effort or due to lucky circumstances, whether the cause is stable, and whether he has control of the outcome. If he believes success is due to his effort, is stable, and is controllable, his self-efficacy in the situation will be high. Self-efficacy has been shown to influence performance; therefore, the higher the batters self-efficacy regarding this specific situation, the more likely he is to hit the grand slam. In turn, the outcome of hitting the grand slam affects future attributions and increases self-efficacy, thus creating an ongoing positive cycle. Of course, this process can also occur in a negative cycle. What creates self-efficacy? The individuals self-efficacy about a given situation tends to be derived from several sources of potential attributions. Previous performance experiences are the most significant source of attributions that affects the development of self-efficacy. For example, a golfer makes his putt on the last three holes, his belief that he can make the next putt is increased. However, if he did not make the last three putts, this his belief in his ability to putt is decreased. Another source of information that affects self-efficacy is observing others performing a specific task, referred to as vicarious experiences. If an athlete observes someone successfully perform a specific behavior that appears to be within the athletes skill range, the athletes self-efficacy regarding that behavior may increase. This is a weaker relationship than previous performance experiences possibly because as observed behaviors become more complex and out of the athletes skill level, it does not enhance self-efficacy. Other sources of information include verbal persuasion and the athletes physiological state of arousal; however, these sources have not been empirically shown to have much impact on self-efficacy. The lack of impact from verbal persuasion may be due to recent previous performance experience tending to override the verbal persuasion. In other words, if an athlete just had a bad performance experience, she may be less likely to listen to a coachs persuasion that she is capable of performing a specific task. However, from cognitive theory, we know that if persuasion is logically based, then it can be more effective. For instance, if the coach uses examples of specific past performances or related skills, then the athletes self-efficacy may be influenced. However, the research evidence is not strong in this area. Finally, the athletes physiological state of arousal has not been particularly significant in predicting changes in self-efficacy possibly because level of arousal can be interpreted negatively or positively by different individuals. How is self-efficacy increased? 1) Building Upon Successful Experiences. Given that we know the components of self-efficacy and the sources of information that change self-efficacy, we are capable of developing strategies to increase self-efficacy. For instance, previous performance is the strongest factor affecting self-efficacy; therefore, a coach may want to set up situations that provide for successful experiences for the athlete. An effective method can be to break down more complex skills into smaller, more specific components that challenge the athlete but are within his or her current ability level. The martial arts are an example of a systematic approach to this concept. For each belt rank in the martial arts, certain skills are taught starting with basic skills and building upon those skills until the more complex skills are learned at the higher belt level. For instance, a student is first taught simple kicks, then the kicks may be combined with extension techniques to obtain distance, then basic jump kicks are taught, and finally, the more complex jump kicks are taught. The skills at each level are challenging but not overwhelming to the athlete. This allows the athlete to have successful experiences which increases self-efficacy. 2) Observations of Peers' Success. Another method of increasing self-efficacy is having an athlete observe others successfully performing a skill. However, it is not enough to observe the skill but also believe that she has the ability to copy what she observed. If she is watching an elite figure skater do a triple loop she is not going to believe that she can copy it, but if she observes a friend with similar abilities do a spin she may have greater belief in her ability to copy the technique. 3) Specific Positive Feedback. Verbal persuasion can also be used to increase self-efficacy either in combination with the above methods or alone. Generally, with verbal persuasion it is important to be give very specific feedback which is best related to previous performance so as to convince the athlete of his or her ability to accomplish a task. Therefore, saying You can do it! is not as effective as saying You successfully jumped 24 inches, you can do 26 inches. 4) Psychological Skills Training. Finally, helping the athlete to learn to find and maintain his optimal level of physiological intensity to successfully perform can increase his belief in his ability. This can be done by teaching relaxation techniques to decrease intensity and self-talk to increase or decrease intensity level as needed. Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Excel At Life'sAndroid Self-Help Apps Excel At Life's apps provide education to be an informed consumer of mental health services and contain resources to use in collaboration with a health professional. The questionnaires in the apps are not intended for diagnostic purposes but are meant as a guide to help you improve your life and your relationships. Current apps: CBT Tools for Healthy Living Stop Panic and Anxiety Self-Help Mindful Attitude: Qi Gong, Meditation, Relaxation Know Yourself Personality Tests Depression CBT Self-Help Guide Cognitive Styles CBT Test Self-Esteem Blackboard Jealousy Test & CBT Self-Help SportPsych Performance Coach Excel At Life Ad-Free Support Google Play CBT Tools for Healthy Living CBT Tools for Healthy Living by Excel At Life teaches you how to use the cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods in a simple format. Learn the CBT methods shown by decades of psychological research to be effective for changing your emotions/moods and behavior that contribute to depression, anxiety and stress, as well as problems in relationships, career and physical health. These CBT methods can be used as self-help for minor issues or can be used in collaboration with your therapist to develop a treatment plan best suited to your situation. The Daily Goals feature can be used to record your plan and completed activities. CBT tools included in this app: Cognitive Diary Inspire Diary Healthy Activities Log Mood Log Daily Goals Tests Install Stop Panic and Anxiety Self-Help Learn to control panic and get relief from anxiety. Relaxation, mindfulness, and teaching audios. Mood log and analysis, cognitive diary, healthy goals & more! Learn the cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods shown in psychological research to be effective in managing panic and anxiety. These CBT methods can be used as self-help for minor issues or can be used in collaboration with your therapist to develop a treatment plan best suited to your situation. Prior to using CBT methods you should consult with your physician as sometimes panic and anxiety may be related to a physical condition. Methods included in this app: Assistance, relaxation and mindfulness audios Qi Gong videos Cognitive Diary Healthy Activities Log Mood Log Daily Goals Tests Install Mindful Attitude: Qi Gong, Meditation, Relaxation Learn to create a mindful attitude and to relax with a variety of methods! This app provides mindfulness training, stress management exercies, guided imagery, meditations, and qi gong videos. Benefits of meditation, relaxation, and mindfulness: improves quality of life manages stress and related symptoms such as depression and anxiety reduces the impact of physical illness particularly arthritis, fibromyalgia, high blood pressure reduces pain improves quality of sleep and reduces insomnia Install Know Yourself Personality Tests Test yourself and your friends to compare test results. The results are meant as a guide to help you improve your life and your relationships. You can not only take tests to understand yourself but you can compare tests with friends to determine compatibility of relationships and compare your ideal self to explore areas of improvement. Includes over 40 tests covering more than 100 personality characteristics. Some of the tests: Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Comprehensive Personality Test What Is Your Self-Concept? Do You Forgive Easily? Do You Have Anger Problems? Self-Control Problems? How Persistent Are You? Do You Have Fear Avoidance? Install Depression CBT Self-Help Guide The natural management of depression involves understanding depression and the factors that contribute to the symptoms. Learning to manage stress in your life and engage in self-care behaviors can improve your symptoms. These CBT methods can be used as self-help for minor issues or can be used in collaboration with your therapist to develop a treatment plan best suited to your situation. Methods included in this app: Cognitive Diary Assistance, relaxation and mindfulness audios Healthy Activities Log Screening test with graph Install Cognitive Styles Test By understanding your styles of thinking, you can use cognitive-behavioral therapy methods to improve your life. The Cognitive Styles Test is not intended for diagnostic purposes but is meant as a guide to help you improve your life and your relationships. Cognitive styles assessed: Anxious Style Self-Esteem Style Perfectionistic Style Approval-Seeking Style Demand Style Withholding Style Control Style Dependency Style Externalizing Style Emotional Style Passivity Style Trust Style Blaming Style Install Self-Esteem Blackboard Characteristics of low self-esteem: Negativity towards self Feelings of unhappiness Feelings of anxiety Feelings of inferiority or superiority Impatience or irritation with self or others Externally oriented goals Does low self-esteem affect your relationships, your success at work, your quality of life? Use cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods to improve your self-esteem! These CBT methods can be used as self-help for minor issues or can be used in collaboration with your therapist. Methods included in this app: Affirmation journal Test: What Is Your Self-Concept? Self-Esteem audios to change negative self-talk Relaxation audios Install Jealousy Test & CBT Self-Help Learn the cognitive-behavioral therapy methods to help address jealousy issues that can create problems in your relationships. The app provides a test to evaluate why you are jealous and a diary method and assistance audio to change the jealous thinking. These CBT methods can be used as self-help for minor issues or can be used in collaboration with your therapist to develop a treatment plan best suited to your situation. Signs irrational jealousy may be causing problems: Are you overly suspicious of your partner? Do you question your partner excessively? Do you check up on your partner? Do you need frequent reassurance? Does your jealousy cause anger directed at your partner? Is your relationship being harmed by these issues? Is your jealousy contrary to the evidence? Install SportPsych Performance Coach Sport psychology uses the principles of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) to teach the use of mental methods to improve your performance in any sport but can be especially useful with golf, martial arts, track. Install this app to learn the mental skills to increase your motivation, focus, concentration, awareness and flow to improve your athletic performance. Methods included in this app: Questionnaire to determine focus of SportPsych training Motivational and relaxation audios Performance evaluation journal and analysis Intensity training and imagery practice audios Install Excel At Life Ad-Free Support Support Excel At Life for an ad-free experience with your favorite Excel At Life apps! The purchase of this app not only provides you with an ad-free experience with the listed apps, but it allows Excel At Life to continue to provide apps that can help you improve your life. Before purchasing this app, try the free apps first. All your data is preserved in the free app, only the ads are removed when you purchase this app. Install Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Jealousy Assistance If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Learning to Control Jealousy Step 1: Learn about jealousy Read articles: When Is Jealousy Irrational? What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy and Impact on Relationships Jealousy: When the Damage is Done Step 2: Take questionnaires to understand yourself Are You Sensitive to Rejection? Do You Have Insecure Attachments? What Is Your Self-Esteem? Step 3: Practice Calming Techniques Daily to Control Physical Reactions Relaxation Audio Downloads Step 4: Challenge Jealous Thinking Jealousy Assistance Audio Download Managing Anger Audio Download Listen to Self-Esteem Audio if Self-Esteem is Low Use the Cognitive Diary for Jealousy All emotions are normal. An emotion in and of itself is not irrational. However, what we decide based upon our emotions can be irrational and lead to destructive behavior. Although certain behaviors related to an emotion can create problems, the emotion itself may have some validity. The purpose of emotions is to provide us with information. Once we have the information, we may then choose appropriate action. However, as with any information, emotions may be misunderstood. How we make sense of an emotion may not always lead to the accurate meaning of the emotion. Therefore, our chosen actions may not resolve the problem the emotion brought to our attention, or make even create additional difficulties. For example, let's look at the emotion of anger. Let's imagine a situation where a person is excluded from some event such as not being invited to a wedding. In that situation, it may be normal for the person to be hurt and angry. "How could she not invite me? I've always been there for her." Thus, the information the anger provides is that the friend feels rejected and left out of an important event. If the person recognizes this information, he may decide to respond by contacting his friend and communicating how he feels: "I don't understand why I wasn't included." In which case it is possible he might find out that the slight was unintentional, or there was a reasonable explanation, or maybe his friend has a problem with him that she hasn't addressed. No matter what the situation, it gives him an opportunity to confront the situation and try to resolve the problem. However, what if he misinterprets the anger: "She's always leaving me out. She doesn't really care about me" and convinces himself to reject her in turn. What if he decides to go as far as writing a scathing letter about how ungrateful and inconsiderate she is and sends it to her right before her wedding? The first reaction to anger was based on rationally interpreting the anger and responding reasonably. However, the second response was an irrational interpretation which may lead to damaging the relationship beyond repair. In this article, we will examine the emotion of jealousy similarly and identify when it is irrational. In addition, we will look at other meanings of the emotion of jealousy and how to determine what the feeling is indicating. Finally, we will examine the causes of irrational jealousy and focus on methods of learning how to handle jealousy when it is irrational.Read more... Frequently, I am asked how to handle irrational jealous feelings. Usually, the individual recognizes that her feelings are unreasonable with no valid evidence but feels incapable of controlling the jealousy. In addition, the person usually recognizes the destructive nature of indulging in the feelings and the resultingbehavior. Such behavior typically involves excessive questioning of her spouse, suspiciousness, and accusations. Many spouses become extremely frustrated with this behavior because they have no way of proving their faithfulness. This leads to an escalating cycle of anger which is used as further evidence by the jealous spouse that her suspicions are correct. The jealous spouse often desperately wants to stop the behavior but finds that he can't control the thoughts which makes him feel miserable. He believes that if he can just prove his suspicions one way or another, he will feel better. The unfortunate fallacy in this thinking, is that trust can never be proven; it can only be disproved. The definition of trust is the belief that something is true. Therefore, without evidence to the contrary, if we want a satisfying relationship, we have to choose to trust the person we love. Read more... As a child Cynthia's hyperactive behavior often annoyed others. Her teachers frequently reprimanded her in school. The other students called her "stupid" and refused to let her join them in activities. At home, her father criticized her and beat her with a belt whenever her parents received a negative report from school. Due to depression, her mother tended to ignore Cynthia's needs for emotional support and attention. As a result, she grew up expecting rejection from others. It seemed that no matter how hard she tried, all she experienced was rejection. As an adult she had numerous unsuccessful relationships. She desperately wanted the acceptance to be found in a relationship; however, she perceived her partner's behavior negatively often thinking about how he wasn't as committed to the relationship and that she was just good enough until someone else came along. These thoughts led to hostility toward him and accusations "You don't care about me!" Due to her focus on her worries about losing him she did not focus on his needs and provide him with emotional support. Her partner tried to reassure her and comfort her at first but the constant negativity and hostility drained his ability to respond to her needs. Read more... Jealousy Assistance Audio Download Audio that helps you cope with an episode of jealousy. When you are caught up in the obsessive jealous thinking it is difficult to talk yourself out of it. This audio helps you challenge the jealous thinking and to remind you that the jealous behaviors only make the situation worse. The more you listen to it, the more you will be able to challenge the irrational jealous talk yourself. NOTE: This audio is to help those with irrational jealousy. It is not for rational jealousy (when an event has actually occurred) nor is it for psychotic jealousy (when a person can't distinguish reality). AUDIO and TRANSCRIPT An internet reader, "Mike," wrote about a jealousy situation that he has begun to recognize but that has already caused extensive damage to his relationship: "Now, my spouse is hiding everything and refuses to discuss the topic. My gut feeling is that my spouse is out to get revenge, lying and is maybe now really cheating." He indicates that his wife has informed him she has the right to hide the cell phone bills, change e-mail passwords, and erase internet history because of his past behavior. He states,"I tried to explain what is causing my jealousy, yet I feel I'm not being heard or understood. Now, I feel like the one being "abused" because my spouse acts hostile to me and defensive whenever this subject...is brought up." Read more... I had some good questions on my website regarding handling a partner's irrational jealousy. The reason I wrote the article What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage for the individual with the problem jealousy is because until that person decides to make changes nothing can be done to eliminate their jealousy. That article has been very popular and many people have indicated to me that they are trying to change their behavior after reading it. However, there are many other people who are not recognizing their jealous behavior and so their partners are writing to me asking what to do. Just because the person with the jealousy problem is the only one who can change it doesn't mean that there is nothing that you, as the partner, can do about your partner's jealousy. However, the steps you can take may be very challenging and don't come without risk. If you truly want a chance for your partner to change, the best place to start is with yourself. By changing how you respond to your partner's jealousy you will develop a greater understanding of how difficult it is to make changes. This increases your empathy for your partner especially if he/she is trying to make changes. However, it may also make you less tolerant of someone refusing to recognize their problem or do anything about it. This could be a healthy thing for you because you are less likely to remain in a destructive relationship.; Read more... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Wellness: How to Reduce Illness and Its Effects by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Research has shown more and more that mental illness often has a physical component, and that many physical illnesses can be addressed, at least partially, through behavioral means." Tweet Wellness is not only a state of physical health, it is also a state of mind. The mind and body are completely integrated. The mind and body cannot be separated into "This is a physical illness" and "This is a mental illness," although we do just that in our classification schemes. Research has shown more and more that mental illness often has a physical component, and that many physical illnesses can be addressed, at least partially, through behavioral means. Let's look at this through logical analysis. We use medications for many different kinds of problems: to relieve pain, to reduce depression and/or anxiety, to lower blood pressure, to reduce cholesterol, to fight infections, etc. Have you ever wondered why medications work? In the simplest terms possible, medications primarily work because they either mimic or stimulate natural processes. We are chemical beings. Everything that we do, that we think, is through chemical processes. Therefore, when we use medications, we are aiding a natural bodily process. However, what we often fail to recognize is that frequently we have a behavioral means available to us to alter our chemical processes. You probably already know this, but may not have really thought about it. For instance, you may have heard that when you exercise, endorphins are released. Endorphins are a group of chemicals in our bodies that help to reduce pain, improve sleep, and improve mood, among other things. Endorphins are a natural morphine. The reason morphine is an effective pain reliever, is that it mimics this natural chemical. However, when we use behavioral means such as exercise to release this chemical, the effects of the substance are more controlled through the natural mechanisms of the body. Another example of controlling the body through behavioral means is using diet to reduce the risk of heart disease. Are you careful about the amount of cholesterol or fats that you ingest? If so, you are engaged in behaviorally controlling physical processes. As you already know, we have a behavioral means of controlling illness. But you may not know the extent of your control. The following will provide you with some ideas. First, however, I will discuss the relationship between stress and illness. The Stress/Illness Relationship More than 30 years ago, a moderate relationship was discovered between heart disease and stressful life events. A moderate relationship in research terms means that stress appeared to contribute to heart disease, but did not appear to be a factor in every individual with heart disease. But it was enough of a relationship to warrant further inspection. As a result of the findings of this investigation, thousands of research studies have been conducted to understand the relationship between stress and illness further. To summarize the outcome of all this research, the relationship between stress and illness was fairly consistently present even when different types of physical and psychological illnesses were examined and when different definitions of stress were used. However, the relationship remained a moderate one which vexed researchers. In particular, they wondered how two people could have the same stress factors in their lives, and yet, one developed illness and the other did not. This question led to research examining other factors that moderate, or reduce, the effects of stress so that in some people the same stressors may not contribute to illness. These factors became known as "stress buffers" and this research has aided in the understanding of wellness. As stress itself is not easy to eliminate from a person's life, what are the things a person can do that can buffer, or reduce, the impact of stress? A Comment About Time Many times in my clinical practice I hear, "I'm too busy to relax," or " I just don't have the time to exercise." These individuals come to me reporting symptoms related to stress, sometimes psychological symptoms and sometimes physical symptoms. What they often fail to realize is that these symptoms themselves take time. In other words, how much time is the person wasting by having the symptom? First of all, they are in my office and that takes time. They also may be seeing a physician for related physical problems. They may be taking medication which means the time getting the prescription and getting it filled. A common symptom from stress is poor concentration, so they may be taking much more time making decisions and understanding situations than they did previously. People are unlikely to become more productive when they are stressed. As you see, not caring for yourself can be very time-consuming. Relaxation A basic gauge for relaxation is to spend at least a half hour a day engaging in some type of relaxation. Such relaxation does not include television or sleeping. However, it may include listening to music, non-productive reading (in other words, not work-related), guided imagery, meditation, prayer, or sitting and enjoying nature, to name a few things. The most important criteria for the activity you do for relaxation is that you find it enjoyable and relaxing. Exercise Exercise provides us with many benefits that can improve health and prevent the negative effects of stress. Generally, twenty to thirty minutes of aerobic exercise three to five times a week is recommended to benefit your heart. However, for stress management each individual may find different levels of exercise that provide the greatest benefit. Many people don't exercise because they set expectations for themselves that are unreasonable. For instance, they may resolve to exercise for an hour a day. Then the first time they are unable to meet their resolution, they quit. However, if they set a reasonable expectation, they may be more likely to meet it such as resolving to exercise, on the average, three times a week. Regular exercise helps to improve sleep, concentration, and attitude. In addition, it helps with weight loss and it helps reduce the risk factors associated with many physical illnesses. Attitude How we think about situations and problems contributes to reducing the impact of stress. Research shows that people who view themselves as having little means to affect their lives, will suffer more consequences from stress. For instance, an individual who doesn't believe s/he has any control in his/her life will more frequently give up and not try to do anything that can change a situation. Therefore, it is important to believe that we can change our lives through the choices we make and the activities we undertake. I call this a "realistic" attitude and distinguish it from a "positive" attitude. Thinking positively can be just as unrealistic and thinking negatively. The reason people often say that positive thinking doesn't work for them is that when we think overly positive, we don't believe it and are unlikely then to act on it. In order to believe something, it has to be realistic. For example, are you more will to accept "Everything is going to be okay" or "This may be difficult, but I can handle it." Learn to cultivate a realistic attitude that focuses on your ability to cope with the problems that come your way. Nutrition Not only is nutrition important in preventing or reducing the impact of physical illness, but research is also accumulating that shows the impact of nutrition certain foods on moods and emotional well-being. Again, you may recognize this by paying attention to your own moods and behavior related to particular foods. How many times have you felt tired and sluggish after eating certain foods while other foods have contributed to increased energy? How often do you turn to food to make you feel better? How often do you have cravings for certain foods? Our relationship to food may not be just psychological, but also chemically based. The above provides an overview of some of the issues in the area of wellness and your ability to control the impact of stress. Stress is a fact of life in our society, but we have the means to learn to cope with it. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...there is a sufficient research base to conclude that sports psychology can assist martial artists with achieving peak performance in both katas and sparring. In particular, skills training can aid with regulating intensity in the martial arts as well as improving the physical skills required to be competitive." Tweet INTRODUCTION Although sports psychology is still in its infancy, a tremendous amount of interest has been generated by the potential of psychological principles to enhance athletic performance. In particular, the dedication to empirical examination of the tenets of cognitive-behavioral theory has led to more effective clinical techniques which have been intuitively appealing to sport psychology consultants. As a result, psychological methods were implemented to enhance performance prior to solid research support. However, recent reviews of studies conducted in the last approximately fifteen years have shown the psychological methods to be useful in the area of sports performance enhancement (Greenspan and Feltz, 1989; Weinberg and Comar, 1994). Much of the research in this area has focused on individual sports or individual skills for team sports as that allows for better experimental designs. As the research base has grown, it has become possible to select particular sports, especially those that are individually based, and examine the literature for the factors that influence performance. A number of studies have specifically focused on enhancing performance in the martial arts as the martial arts are conducive to empirical study given their nature and the reasons that individuals participate in the martial arts. Columbus and Rice (1998) examined written descriptions of reasons individuals participate in martial arts and found four themes: 1) criminal victimization; 2) growth and discovery including challenging self mentally, physically, or spiritually, and facing fears; 3) life transition and wanting to get life in control; and 4) task performance and seeing martial arts achievement as contributing to achieving in other life situations and tasks. Several of these themes involve a desire for life enhancement likely due to the view of the martial arts as a way of life rather than simply a sport. Many of the mental skills strategies used in sports psychology have been found to be effective in achieving peak performance throughout lifes experiences (Orlick, 2000). These strategies have frequently been used in the martial arts but may not have always been systematically taught. For instance, Rodney Hard (1983) wrote a sparring principles manual based on methods taught to him by Joe Lewis, the World Karate Champion. He indicated that there were three stages of development to compete effectively in tournaments: 1) physical skills training; 2) application of the principles of sparring; and 3) the development and use of psychological skills to enhance performance. The most important psychological skill according to Hard (1983) is focus, which he refers to as external focus. Generally, any internal focus on negative thoughts, future thinking, or fear will create anxiety and lack of confidence, which will interfere with competition performance. When an individual is externally focused, confidence and determination is more apparent and the individuals movements flow without anticipation or conscious decision-making. The performance in the ring becomes automatic and focused on the present moment. The karate fighter is not focused on ego or self, but on perfecting skill and is detached from the outcome. This state of detachment is consistent with the concept of flow, or being in the zone. An examination of the literature involving flow in athletics by Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi (1999), identifies a number of components that characterize flow. To achieve flow, a task has to be challenging but the person needs the level of skill to be able to meet the challenge; it doesnt matter the particular skill level of the athlete as long as the challenge and level of skill is in balance. During flow, action and awareness merge so that the body and mind function as one. To achieve flow, the athlete needs clear goals, unambiguous feedback, concentration on the task at hand, and a sense of control over the event. The experience of flow involves the loss of self-consciousness and transformation of time. Flow is an autotelic experience in that it is intrinsically rewarding in itself and is sought out because it is fun. Fredrick (1999) identified twelve themes common to achieving peak performance, or flow, in karate competition through a qualitative study of seven highly experienced national competitors. During precompetition, common themes included unique person/situation experiences, mental skills training, the importance of confidence as a positive expectancy, and the development of physical skills. Themes common to the competition phase included transitions into and out of peak moments, the experience of altered states, applying mental skills, and experiencing confidence as power. Finally, the postcompetition phase included themes of reflections on experience, assessing and improving mental skills, and growth in confidence. This study shows peak moment in sport karate to be a dynamic process that involves transitions in and out of flow as well as growth over time. In addition, confidence is an important aspect to the attainment of peak moments during competition. The athletes studied indicated that achieving flow through peak performance was a goal in training and personally rewarding. Interviews of martial artists by Hodge and Deakin (1998) indicated that martial artists tend to enjoy activities most relevant to improving their performance and that mental work and physical work are both considered important in the martial arts. The more relevant the martial artists found a task, the greater emphasis they placed on concentration. According to Fredrick (1999), mental skills used by martial artists during precompetition to achieve peak performance included visualization, raising emotion, warm-up routines, and focus. During the competition phase, the mental skills involved focus/concentration, relaxation, and a strong motivation to win. Postcompetition involved an assessment of performance and mental skills growth. Throughout the competitive process, confidence was a critical factor. EXPERTISE AND PERFORMANCE Several research studies have examined the differences between experts in the martial arts and novices in order to determine the factors that contribute to peak performance. A number of personality traits have been found to differentiate between superior martial artists and average martial artists according to a study by Duthie, et.al (1978) using the Adjective Checklist and Martial Arts Questionnaire. In particular, superior martial artists were higher on the scales on defensiveness, self-confidence, achievement, dominance, endurance, affiliation, heterosexuality, exhibitionism, and autonomy. They were lower on the scales of succorance, abasement, and counseling readiness. Duthie, et.al (1978) concluded that the difference between superior and average martial artists implies that martial arts training changed the personal characteristics rather it being a product of self-selection. Another area of significant differences between experts and novices is in the area of search patterns during sparring. Williams and Elliotts review (1999) of visual search strategy indicates that the most efficient pattern is one with fewer fixations of longer durations. During sparring matches, more expert fighters primary fixation was on the opponents head and central body while using peripheral scanning of extremities, the hands and feet. They indicated that no previous research had been conducted examining anxietys effect on visual search strategy, although generally it has been shown that arousal causes a narrowing of the perceptual field potentially requiring a change in visual search strategy which could be detrimental to performance. Williams and Elliott (1999) examined eight expert martial artists with an average of 5.6 years training and eight novices with no prior training by manipulating stress conditions during sparring. Having a competitive condition involving a ranking and a prize created anxiety. In addition, telling them their results were poor and would have to be discarded created an ego stressor. A manipulation check of anxiety indicated a difference in anxiety between the conditions. The results indicated that generally anxiety caused an increase in search rate and an increase in the amount of time spent fixating on the periphery. The competition condition caused a decrease in viewing time overall and an increase in response accuracy. Anxiety causes an increment in effort in an attempt to increase the amount of resources available to invest in the task, thereby improving performance effectiveness (Williams and Elliott, 1999). However, as this experiment was an artificial condition without much ego investment, the curvilinear relationship of an optimal level of arousal and too much arousal causing a decrease in performance may not have been recreated. Overall, the results show that expert martial artists have greater anticipation skills which suggests that perceptual skill in karate depends on task-specific knowledge structures acquired through experience (Williams and Elliott, 1999). Under anxiety conditions novices reduced fixation duration whereas experts increased the length of fixation duration; there was also a trend toward increases in the number of fixations and the number of fixation locations for novices which indicates that novices were more affected by the anxiety condition than were the experts (Williams and Elliott, 1999). The relevance of this research to training indicates that in order to develop a reproducible but flexible search system, performers must be exposed to the same constraints as those experienced during competition (Williams and Elliott, 1999). Martial artists need to be taught to focus attention on relevant areas. In particular, they need to focus on central areas with the fovea and use their peripheral vision to pick up on arm and leg movement. In addition, they need to develop coping strategies to reduce effects of anxiety on visual search strategies. To examine the intentional transfer of motor skills to a new situation and the influence of expertise on the transfer, Ferrari (1999) observed twenty karate students, ten at the black belt level and ten novices, as they were involved in learning a novel but related task, Tai Chi. Four strategies for practice were observed: 1) they practiced the whole sequence (30%); 2) they practiced cumulative sections by adding new sequences to previously learned sequence (20%); 3) they practiced overlapping sections (40%); or 4) they practiced independent sections (10%). In addition, observation of the students use of the training video showed several methods of use: 1) they watched the video without physically performing movements (75%); 2) they imitated the sequence while video is playing (10-15%); or 3) they stopped the video and mentally reconstructed the movement (10%). Experts and novices did not differ in the strategies they used for practice or the way they used the video. Ratings of their final performance showed that the experts and novices remembered the same amount of new material; however, the experts performance was rated higher, they were better at judging how well they learned the material, and they used the learning material in a more sophisticated and efficient manner. The author also found in examining the self-talk of the participants that 75% of the novices focused on the difficulty of the task as opposed to 40% of the experts; the experts self-talk was more general and focused more on learning strategies. INFLUENCES ON SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE A number of factors have been found to influence skill development and performance in the martial arts. These include methods of motivation, context for teaching new material, presence of music, presence of an evaluative audience or other participants, and perceptual skill. Motivational Climate. Theeboom, et. al. (1995) described two theories of motivation in youth sports: 1) competence motivation theory which indicates that those who see themselves as competent and as having internal control are more intrinsically motivated; and 2) achievement goal theory which proposes that individuals are motivated to demonstrate high ability based on either ego goals which are ability oriented or task goals which are mastery oriented. Their review of the literature indicates that a mastery climate in a sport setting is associated with greater perceived effort, greater enjoyment, and increased team satisfaction whereas a focus on performance outcome leads to greater worry and less team satisfaction. In order to explore the idea that children have a more positive motivational pattern when they have a mastery goal orientation, Theeboom, et.al. (1995) divided 102 boys and 67 girls enrolled in a six week summer group into two groups: 1) a traditional method group which used basic drills for practice, had an authoritative teacher, focused on individual exercises, and based recognition and evaluation on performance; and 2) a mastery method group which used a variety of exercises, shared decision-making, utilized partner and small group exercises, and focused on effort and improvement. For example, the traditional method group may do repeated leg kicks whereas the mastery method group may kick a ball, a bag, or the instructors hand and students may suggest combinations and exercises. Results showed that the mastery group enjoyed the class more although there was no difference in the participants perceived competence. The quantitative analysis did not show difference for intrinsic motivation but the interview showed greater intrinsic motivation for the mastery group. Overall, the mastery group was rated higher in performance of motor skills. The authors concluded that the more informal and flexible teaching style used for the mastery method group may be effective early on in training but the later stages of training may require some traditional teaching exercises as well. Context in Motor Recall. Hodge and Deakins (1998) review of deliberate practice research showed that elite athletes and musicians tend to enjoy deliberate practice contrary to Ericsson et.al.s (1993) definition of deliberate practice. The characteristics of deliberate practice as defined by Ericsson et.al. (1993) included: 1) the greater the expertise of the individual, the more they engage in deliberate practice; 2) deliberate practice elicits the greatest improvements; 3) deliberate practice tends to be effortful and fatiguing which decreases the amount of time in which it can be engaged; and 4) it is highly relevant to performance but is not considered enjoyable. Athletes typically report that the activities closest to actual performance as well as their work with their instructor or coach are the most relevant activities to improve their sport performance. Research shows a strong positive correlation between relevance and effort or concentration required (Hodge and Deakin, 1998). Hodge and Deakin (1998) examined the effect of context on motor recall in learning a kata by teaching a kata with and without context to a group of ten novice martial artists and a group of ten first degree black belts. The context the instructor used was a verbal description of a battle. Teaching in martial arts traditionally involves a whole-part-whole strategy in which the instructor will first teach the entire kata to give a sense of flow followed by breaking the kata down into parts to decrease the complexity of the learning requirements. Therefore, they used a three trial method in this research and examined improvement across the trials. Although the students rated the context-aided instruction as enhancing the memory process, the initial context trial showed decrease performance over the no context trial for the novices and no difference for the black belts. Interestingly, the black belt performance actually decreased in the third trial as compared to their second trial when context was present. The authors had not expected that black belt performance would be affected at all by context because their experience allows them to more easily recognize meaningful associations and interpreted this finding as indicating that the black belts internally generated context may be more meaningful than the context provided. Overall, they did not find support for pairing verbal context with motor information to enhance performance. Music and Performance. Fergusan, et.al (1994) studied the effects of music on performance of katas by karate students with one to 18 years of experience. Experienced observers used the Kata Evaluation Scale consisting of a seven point Likert scale measuring elements of performance to evaluate performance during each condition of positive music, negative music, and white noise provided on headsets for each performer. Overall, both negative music and positive music increased performance ratings over white noise; in addition, the subjects reported greater relaxation and comfort with the music. Audience Effects On Performance. A review of the audience effects on performance literature by Bell and Yee (1989) indicated that consistent with social facilitation theory it is generally believed that an audience enhances the performance of a well-learned task whereas performance is impaired for a poorly learned task. However, the research examining athletic performance has been inconsistent possibly due to poor design. Bell and Yee (1989) examined eight females and 25 males with an average age of 24 years on a kicking drill. The subjects performed a roundhouse kick without setting the foot down as many times as possible in fifteen seconds with and without an audience. As expected, results indicated that skilled subjects generally kicked more accurately and with greater frequency. An audience impaired the performance of the unskilled subjects but didnt affect performance by the skilled subjects. It may not have been possible for the audience to enhance the performance of the skilled subjects due to a ceiling effect given that they were already performing at three kicks per second. To determine the effects of other participants on performance, Layton and Moran (1999) examined 11 male karate black belts with an average of 15.8 years training while performing a kata as a group. They found that even though the participants had refined the kata over years of practice with their own timing, the timing became more consistent when the kata was performed as a group. Training Perceptual Skill. A review of perceptual abilities in athletes by Williams and Grant (1999) indicates that elite athletes do not have superior visual ability and that training vision does not improve sports performance. However, skilled athletes have better perceptual skills and are more capable of selectively attending to, recognizing, analyzing, and interpreting incoming visual information; they can recognize and recall playing patterns more quickly and accurately; they are better at anticipating their opponents behaviors through efficient visual search strategies; and they are more accurate in their expectations of their opponents reactions. Williams and Grant (1999) indicate that perceptual abilities can be trained by using simulation such as watching videos from the competitors perspective, stopping the video prior to critical interactions, and having the viewer predict the reaction or have the viewer react physically based on the prediction. ANXIETY AND PERFORMANCE Anxiety can affect sports performance positively or negatively. Terry and Slades (1995) review of anxiety in the sports literature indicated that anxiety is a multi-dimensional construct which includes both somatic and cognitive components; cognitive anxiety has an inverse relationship with performance such that an increase in irrational thoughts related to anxiety will decrease performance whereas somatic anxiety has an inverted U relationship with performance such that an optimal level of anxiety improves performance whereas too much anxiety will decrease performance. Taylor (1996) emphasizes the importance of conceptualizing anxiety as intensity because competitors may misunderstand the terms anxiety, nervousness, or arousal. Accordingly, problems can be created for athletes by both overintensity and underintensity; therefore, each athlete needs to develop the ability to find and maintain their prime intensity level that is most optimal to performance. Research has found that not only can level of anxiety predict outcome of competition, but that martial arts training appears to decrease overall anxiety. Predicting Competition Results. Terry and Slade (1995) examined state measures in predicting martial arts competition results. Their review of the mood literature indicated that the Profile of Mood States is ineffective in differentiating between athletes of different abilities and achievement, that athletes tend to have more positive moods than the general population, that mood seems to discriminate between winners and losers only when there is little difference in their ability, that preperformance mood measures discriminate only when performance is of short duration, and that individual sports may be more influenced by mood than team sports. Using the Profile of Mood States and the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory 2 with 104 brown belts with an average age of 22 and 104 black belts with an average age of 29, Terry and Slade (1995) found that 92% of the winners could be predicted based on mood and 93.5% of winners could be predicted on the basis of mood and anxiety. Administering the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory 2 to 142 Tae Kwon Do novices through black belts one hour prior to competition, Chapman, et.al (1997) found that anxiety scores could predict 63% of winners and losers. The winners were lower on both somatic anxiety and cognitive anxiety. Effect of Martial Arts on Anxiety Reduction. Several studies support the impact martial arts training has on reducing anxiety. Using college students in physical education classes, Foster (1997) found that compared to Aikido and golf, only karate decreased trait anxiety significantly as measured by the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory; however, there was no change on state anxiety. A study by Layton (1990) examining anxiety in karate students ages 16 to 54 from novices to 5th degree black belt using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory showed that non-black belt grades were significantly higher on both state and trait anxiety. With age controlled, it was found that the number of years of training was negatively related to both trait and state anxiety. The author suggests the need for longitudinal studies to determine whether karate training reduces anxiety or whether it is a product of self-selection so that those with lower anxiety are more likely to attain black belt status. Managing Anxiety During Competition. Weinberg et.al. (1981) indicated that studies examining methods of reducing precompetitive anxiety have been equivocal. They examined the effects of visuo-motor behavior rehearsal (VMBR) on performance in karate using 32 male karate students ages 18-24 who were matched according to skill level and assigned to a relaxation condition, a VMBR condition, an imagery condition, and an attention-placebo group. The VMBR group involved relaxation training, visualizing karate performance during a stressful situation, and then performing the skill during simulation of a stressful situation. During the six weeks of training, all four treatment groups showed a decrease in trait anxiety with no difference between the groups. However, the relaxation and VMBR groups showed less precompetitive state anxiety than the imagery and attention-placebo groups. The VMBR group performed better in sparring than all the other groups which was not just a matter of the low state anxiety since the relaxation group also had low state anxiety. Apparently, imagery prepares the mind and body for the competitive performance. Thus, being in a relaxed state combined with the imagery appears to allow the athlete to develop a relaxed concentration and focus on the relevant cues in the sports environment (Weinberg, et.al., 1981). However, the simpler skills did not differ between groups possibly because there is a broader range of optimal arousal for the simpler skills than for the difficult skills. COGNITIVE SKILLS AND PERFORMANCE Beliefs and performance. The cognitions, or thought processes, in which an athlete engages can be critical to performance. Several assumptions underlie the use of cognitive-behavioral inventions: 1) Cognitions can affect athletic performance; 2) These thought processes can be changed; and, 3) This change can influence behavioral change, and therefore, improve performance (Williams and Leffingwell, 1996). Williams and Leffingwell (1996) identified several areas of irrational beliefs that can affect the athletes performance. In particular, they indicated that perfectionistic demands may cause a poor self-concept or feelings of inadequacy which increase the likelihood of failure. However, they distinguish between perfectionistic demands and perfectionistic desires indicating that a perfectionistic desire, which is achievable and not judgmental, may increase the likelihood of success. Other irrational beliefs include catastrophizing about failure, basing self-worth on achievement, focusing on fairness in competition, and generalizing from a single performance to overall competence. Goal Orientation and Performance. For the purpose of examining goal orientation and performance, King and Williams (1997) had novice martial arts college students complete the Task and Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire and rate their satisfaction and performance; in addition, their instructors rated their performance in basic skills, effort, persistence, and consistency. Task orientation is a mastery approach that focuses on hard work, learning goals, improving skills, and gaining understanding, whereas a performance orientation is focused on ego, competition success, gaining recognition, establishing superiority over others, and a belief in natural ability rather than hard work. Generally, traditional martial arts is focused on mastering self-defense and perfecting techniques which is consistent with a task orientation approach whereas contest-oriented martial arts is focused on tournament preparation and is consistent with a performance orientation. King and Williams (1997) found that a task orientation predicted performance and was positively correlated with enjoyment. EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS FOR PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT Effectiveness of Interventions Generally in Sports. Greenspan and Feltz (1989) reviewed studies that used regular athletes and that measured performance and examined interventions including relaxation training, behavioral techniques, and cognitive restructuring. Of the 23 studies reviewed, causality could be determined in 11 and eight of those demonstrated improvement in performance as a result of psychological skills training. The interventions examined were primarily educational rather than remedial, the majority were multicomponent and included relaxation, and those that used cognitive interventions usually had education, relaxation or visualization along with a coping procedure. The majority of the relaxation studies used VMBR and two-thirds used a progressive muscle relaxation technique which may be more appealing to athletes than a passive approach. Of the five studies providing a direct comparison of different intervention approaches, three showed that a combined treatment procedure was superior to relaxation or imagery alone and the other two studies were inconclusive. The authors concluded that educational relaxation-based interventions and remedial cognitive restructuring are effective for enhancing sports performance. They suggested that more studies need to use manipulation checks to determine if relaxation and cognitive restructuring were having the intended effects. In addition, they expressed concern of a possible bias towards publishing studies with positive results, with the lack of examination of ethnic/cultural issues, with the effects of the interventions on nontargeted performance areas, and with the lack of attention to the maintenance of effects. They recommend that if single subjects are used in future research, the researchers need to use appropriate designs and controls in order to infer causality. In addition, interventions need to be standardized and compared directly to one another. A review by Weinberg and Comar (1994) of previous reviews and research conducted since the reviews examined 45 studies looking at the effectiveness of psychological skills training (PST) in competitive sport, of which causality could be inferred from twenty. Of these studies, 85% showed significant effects for PST and the more recent reviews showed an even higher percentage of positive effects perhaps because PST has become more developed utilizing more individualized, systematic methods over a longer time period with a variety of psychological techniques. Weinberg and Comar (1994) suggested that: 1) future research needs to use manipulation checks to assure that the manipulation was effective; 2) the publication biases against research with no effects be considered in evaluative reviews; 3) follow-up assessments are necessary to determine the long-term effectiveness of PST; 4) control groups should be used routinely; and 5) more diverse samples need to be used. To determine factors that affect Olympic performance, Gould et.al (1999) interviewed four U.S. Olympic teams that met the National Governing Bodys (NGB) expectations and four teams that failed to meet the NGBs expectations. They conducted interviews separately with coaches and in focus groups with several team members from each team. Generally, they found that teams that failed to meet performance expectations reported that they did not spend enough time in mental preparation or did not stick to a mental preparation routine. In addition, they tended to lack planning or follow through on plans such as having more travel problems. Often there were team cohesion problems, coaching problems, lack of Olympic experience by athletes and coaches, lack of focus and commitment, and problems with overtraining. Whereas teams that met performance expectations were more likely to have trained together prior to the games, felt support from the crowd, were mentally prepared to deal with stress, had families who were educated on how to support the athlete, and felt a total commitment and ability to reframe negative events more positively. Interviews with the successful athletes indicated that the coping skills needed to be so well learned that they were automatic; learning psychological skills immediately prior to competition was not effective. Effectiveness of Interventions Specifically in Martial Arts. Generally, case studies have shown that individualized psychological strategies may be more effective for performance enhancement because the various techniques may be helpful to some individuals and not to others. For example, relaxation techniques work well for athletes who are overly anxious but may be detrimental to those who are not anxious. Seabourne, et.al. (1985) examined the difference between individualized interventions, nonindividualized interventions, and packaged intervention strategies. The individualized intervention involved assessment, teaching strategies in a group format, and instructor suggestions as to the most appropriate strategies for each individual. The participants in the non-individualized intervention condition were each yoked to a participant in the individualized condition and were taught the same methods as that participant. The packaged group participants were taught a variety of techniques and chose the particular methods they preferred. The placebo control group memorized Chinese writings whereas the control group received no treatment. The training method used was based on Suinns manual The Seven Steps to Peak Performance which provides instruction on relaxation training, stress management, positive thought control, self-regulation, mental rehearsal, concentration, and energy control. The participants included 43 male college students enrolled in beginning karate classes. Performance was rated at the 5th, 10th, and 15th weeks by a 2nd degree black belt on a five point Likert scale for form, intensity, power, and flexibility. The results indicated that both the individualized group and the packaged group performed better than the other conditions. In these two groups, the participants played an active role in choosing strategies which likely gave them a sense of responsibility and commitment to the learning process. In addition, the individual needs assessment may have increased the benefit of the interventions for the individualized condition whereas the packaged programs ease of use may have been helpful for the packaged condition. Seabourne et.al. (1984) also examined the effects of individual practice and visuo-motor behavior rehearsal (VMBR) on karate performance. Previous research on VMBR and performance had been equivocal possibly because the technique had not been individualized. Eighteen males and 26 females enrolled in 16-week karate classes at a university were either taught VMBR or were in a placebo control group in which they discussed, memorized, and meditated on Chinese writings. VMBR involved attaining a relaxed state and then engaging in mental imagery of a sports event. The participants in the VMBR group were taught relaxation meditation techniques which they used for ten minutes and then practiced ten minutes of karate imagery. During each class they practiced with the instructor for ten minutes and were given the opportunity to ask questions in order to individualize the technique. A black belt instructor rated performance of both groups at the 5th week, 10th week, and 15th weeks on basic technique skills, combinations and sparring. In addition, anxiety measurements were taken. The VMBR showed significant decreases in state anxiety while showing better performance in all aspects of the karate even thought the VMBR group was initially poorer in the sparring and combinations. The authors suggest that the difference in the results between this study and previous research may be the longer time period of 16 weeks instead of eight weeks as well as the more individualized approach within a group setting. Based on research conducted in collaboration with Weinberg using martial artists, Seabourne (1998) concludes that: 1) relaxation and imagery together are more effective for martial artists than either alone; 2) martial artists practicing relaxation and imagery ten minutes a day performed better than those who do it immediately before competition; 3) individualized techniques even when taught in a group format are better than standardized group techniques; 4) there is no difference between instructor guided imagery and self-guided imagery; and 5) individualized cognitive techniques improve performance. He recommends the use of diaphragmatic or focused breathing, muscle relaxation and body awareness, meditation, and internal imagery rather than external imagery. Internal imagery is visualization from the perspective of the athlete whereas external imagery is from the perspective of watching the athlete perform. Overall, the research focused on martial artists suggests that the techniques found useful for athletes, in general, are effective for enhancing performance in the martial arts, both in katas as well as sparring. SUGGESTED PLAN FOR INTERVENTIONS Based on their 1994 review Weinberg and Comar suggest that a PST program should involve teaching the basic skills and systematically practicing them during special training sessions. These training sessions should be the first or last 15-30 minutes of physical practice sessions; most new mental skills require 15-30 minutes training three to five times a week and it takes approximately three to six months, to fully learn new skills, practice, and integrate them. Most psychological training should be during supervised practice unless the athlete is fairly self-motivated. As quickly as possible the PST should be integrated with physical skills training and tried during simulated competition. A very specific and detailed precompetition and competition plan for controlling emotions, developing a routine, and dealing with unexpected events should be part of each athletes training and PST should continue as long as the athlete is involved in a sport in the same way as physical skills training is conducted. Serious martial artists devote a great deal of time to learning the physical aspects of their sport. Information Hodge and Deakin (1998) obtained from interviews indicated that their sample practiced an average of 35 hours a week during the first year of training to approximately 58 hours a week the year prior to obtaining the black belt. It is interesting to note that this is very similar to the practice times reported by other elite athletes and elite musicians. Therefore, the couple of hours a week to practice psychological skills to enhance performance can be well worth the investment. A number of practical resources exist that provide how to information for the athlete desiring to enhance performance. However, it is important for the athlete to recognize that, as the research suggests (Seabourne, et.al., 1984, 1985), the techniques need to be tailored for the individual. Sport psychology consultants can help the athlete with developing a plan. A review of qualitative studies of effectiveness of sport psychology consultants (Weinberg and Comar, 1994) suggests that athletes generally see consultants positively and as being helpful. The most desirable characteristics of consultants are accessibility, flexibility in scheduling, knowledgeable, likeable, and a good fit with the team or athlete. Athletes prefer more numerous contacts, follow-up sessions, and an appropriate use of the athletes strengths. Undesirable characteristics of sport psychology consultants are poor interpersonal skills, lack of understanding of specific sport, insensitive to the individual athletes needs, and inappropriate application of skills on site. Comprehensive Plans for Interventions. Terry Orlick (1986), in his book Psyching for Sport, suggests setting performance outcome goals by imagining unlimited potential, setting realistic goals based on history, skill, and motivation for improvement, and setting a goal of self-acceptance no matter the outcome of the event. During competition it is important to focus energy on what is under the athletes control and not to think of winning or losing but to focus on achievable performance goals. A precompetition mental plan should include confidence that the preparation is adequate, methods of avoiding self-defeating thoughts, methods of developing an optimal arousal state, positive performance imagery and mental suggestions such as I have preparedI am capableI am in controlI am ready. During competition, the athlete should be prepared to push the limits and should have particular focus words to use during different aspects of competition. Often athletes dont pay enough attention to refocusing during precompetition and competition. Orlick suggests that if the athlete is not feeling up to his or her usual level to keep it secret from your body. Your body wont know and it will perform as it has been trained. He also indicates that based on his personal experience it takes one to three years to refine a psychological plan enough to help performance consistently; the athlete needs to evaluate the plan after each competition in order to refine it further. In his book, Mastering Your Own Game, David Kauss (2001) suggests a plan to improve athletic performance. He suggests that when using imagery to focus on all five senses and that imagery should not involve thoughts but can be a visualization of actual past events or of participating in a planned event. In addition, it is useful for an athlete to find a spot that is a physical place that is private with easy access and only used for working on the mental game; when in this spot the athlete can build the right internal environment for practicing psychological skills. Once this spot is obtained, the athlete can assess factors affecting his/her sports performance by examining the influence of significant people in his/her life, reviewing the important sports-related events such as falling in love with the sport, peak performances, nightmare performances, obstacles that were overcome and growth events, and identifying places of power that are significant to the individual. The athlete can also assess his or her daydreams about their sport by engaging in self-guided daydreams, journaling about the daydreams and examining the themes that are found such as need for achievement, need for affiliation, and need for power. He also suggests that the athlete keep a daily event diary to include recording events, thoughts, feelings, and actions in order to examine the patterns. Finally, he recommends practicing techniques of relaxation, body awareness, mental rehearsal and visualization, concentration building, and cognitive skills and to develop a personal psychological skills pack based on the overall assessment and personal effectiveness of the different techniques; the techniques in the pack should be assessed and changed based on what works and what doesnt. In order to control anxiety, Kauss (2001) suggests a worry spot technique of providing a time and place for worry rather than it being out-of-control. He espouses the Rule of Peak Performance: Compete with the maximum amount of arousal that you can control. Prior to performance, Kauss (2001) recommends a focus on the following factors: the last practice should be clearly identified, the importance of a rest period, a psychological skills pack review, a normal sleep schedule, attention to nutrition, dressing ritual, use of the psychological skills pack, and a physical warm-up prior to the final go signal. Cognitive Principles to Enhance Performance. Williams and Leffingwell (1996) suggest that self-talk can be used to correct bad habits, to focus attention, to modify intensity level, and increase self-confidence. To identify self-talk, they recommend that the athlete review previous events and imagine events in order to have access to their internal processes; written logs can be helpful in analyzing the self-talk identified. In addition, if the athlete has difficulty identifying self-talk, observations by a sport psychologist can be useful. Once the self-talk has been identified, the athlete can analyze it for irrational content by asking a series of questions: Are the beliefs based on objective reality? Are they helpful to the athlete? Are they useful in reducing interpersonal conflicts? Do they help the athlete reach goals? Do they reduce emotional conflict? (Williams and Leffingwell, 1996). If the answer to these questions is no, the athlete needs to work on modifying the irrational self-talk. Several techniques can be useful: 1) Firmly and deliberately stopping a thought; 2) Changing negative thoughts to more realistic or positive thoughts; 3) Countering negative self-statements; and 4) Reframing the irrational thoughts (Williams and Leffingwell, 1996). Goal Setting Principles. To achieve peak performance and competitive success, Weinberg (1996) suggests the importance of setting specific goals with target dates and strategies for achieving goals. He suggests that these goals should be written down and should include both long and short-term goals as well as goals for both practice and competition. The goals need to be realistic, but challenging, and need to be focused on performance, not winning. Finally, the athlete needs to develop concrete plans for achieving the goals with periodic feedback to assess effectiveness of the plan. Some common pitfalls to setting goals include not recognizing individual differences in setting goals, not setting measurable goals, and setting too many goals (Weinberg, 1996). Guidelines for Using Imagery to Enhance Performance. Gould and Damarjian (1996) indicate that imagery requires extensive practice similar to physical skills. An athlete cant expect performance to be enhanced by using imagery just prior to competition and not practicing it otherwise. To enhance imagery, visual, auditory, tactile, and kinesthetic senses need to be utilized; in particular, dynamic kinesthetic imagery, which is the internal experience of movement, needs to be emphasized. The athlete should learn to control the content of the images as well as to take both the internal and external perspectives and to use real time images. Imagery can be facilitated by being in a relaxed state which can be attained by the use of video or audiotapes. If the athlete is experiencing a particular physical skills problem, imagery can be used to imagine the problem area and to develop methods in overcoming it. Common problems in imagery training include having unrealistic expectations, lack of commitment to practice, and lack of coach support (Weinberg, 1996). CONCLUSION The general literature has clearly shown the effectiveness of psychological skills training to enhance performance in sports. Although martial arts is a specialized area, there is a sufficient research base to conclude that sports psychology can assist martial artists with achieving peak performance in both katas and sparring. In particular, skills training can aid with regulating intensity in the martial arts as well as improving the physical skills required to be competitive. This literature review indicates that important skills to teach in order to enhance performance in the martial arts include: concentration and focused attention (Fredrick, 1999; Williams and Elliott, 1999), confidence (Fredrick, 1999), relaxation, regulation of intensity level, and controlling anxiety (Chapman, et.al., 1997; Fredrick, 1999; Taylor, 1996; Terry and Slade, 1995; William and Elliott, 1999), visual search strategies (William and Elliott, 1999), and self-talk (Ferrari, 1999). A number of methods of been shown to be beneficial to teach these skills. Initially, a needs assessment can determine for each athlete how to individually focus psychological skills training (Kauss, 2001; Seabourne, et.al., 1985). Cognitive restructuring can help manage intensity level, improve concentration, and build confidence (Williams and Leffingwell, 1996). Focused breathing, muscle relaxation and awareness, and meditation can be used to regulate anxiety, or intensity level (Seabourne, 1998; Weinberg, et.al., 1981). Visuo-motor behavior rehearsal has been effective for improving physical performance of martial arts skills (Gould and Damarjian, 1996; Seabourne, 1984; Weinberg, 1996). Also, it is generally recommended to keep self-talk logs, a daily event diary, and to develop a written competition plan (Kauss, 2001; Weinberg, 1994; Williams and Leffingwell, 1996). The recommended structure for psychological skills training is 15-30 minutes several times a week throughout physical training (Weinberg and Comar, 1994). An individualized program that teaches the participants skills that they can incorporate into a personal plan is most effective (Seabourne, et.al, 1985). References Bell, P.A. and Yee, L.A. (1989). Skill level and audience effects on performance of a karate drill. Journal of Social Psychology, 129, 191-200. Chapman, C., Lane, A.M., Brierly, J.H. and Terry, P.C. (1997). Anxiety, self-confidence and performance in Tae Kwon-do. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85, 1275-1278. Columbus, P.J. and Rice, D. (1998). Phenomenological meanings of martial arts participation. Journal of Sport Behavior, 21, 16-29. Duthie, R.B., Hope, L. and Barker, D.G. (1978). Selected personality traits of martial artists as measured by the Adjective Checklist. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 71-76. Ferguson, A.R., Carbonneau, M.R. and Chambliss, C. (1994). Effects of positive and negative music on performance of a karate drill. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 78, 1217-1218. Ferrari, M. (1999). Influence of expertise on the intentional transfer of motor skill. Journal of Motor Behavior, 31, 79-85. Foster, Y.A. (1997). Brief aikido training versus karate and golf training and university students' scores on self-esteem, anxiety, and expression of anger. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84, 609-610. Fredrick, M.J. (1999). Peak Moments in Sport Karate Tournament Competition: Black Belt Fighters in the Zone. A dissertation submitted to the faculty of the University of Utah. Gould, D. and Damarjian, N (1996). Imagery Training for Peak Performance. In J.L. Van Raalte and B.W. Brewer (Eds.), Exploring Sport and Exercise Psychology, (pp. 3-24). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Gould, D., Guinan, D., Greenleaf, C., Medbery, R. and Peterson, K. (1999). Factors affecting Olympic performance: Perceptions of athletes and coaches from more and less successful teams. Greenspan and Feltz. (1989). Psychological interventions with athletes in competitive situations: A review. The Sport Psychologist, 3, 219-236. Hard, R. T. (1983). Sparring Principles. Unpublished. Hodge, T. and Deakin, J.M. (1998). Deliberate practice and expertise in the martial arts: The role of context in motor recall. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 20, 260-279. Jackson, S.A. and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Flow in Sports. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. Kauss, D. (2001). Mastering Your Inner Game. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. King, L.A. and Williams, T.A. (1997). Goal orientation and performance in martial arts. Journal of Sport Behavior, 20, 397-411. Layton, C. (1990). Anxiety in black-belt and nonblack-belt traditional karateka. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 71, 905-906. Layton, C. and Moran, P. (1999). Effect of "group spell" upon Shotokan black-belt performance of Heian kata. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 89, 493-494. Orlick, T. (1986). Psyching for Sport. Champaign, IL: Leisure Press. Orlick, T. (2000). In Pursuit of Excellence. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. Seabourne, T. (1998). The Martial Arts Athlete. Boston, MA: YMAA Publication Center. Seabourne, T., Weinberg, R. and Jackson, A. (1984). Effect of individualized practice and training of visuo-motor behavior rehearsal in enhancing karate performance. Journal of Sport Behavior, 7, 58-67. Seabourne, T., Weinberg, R., Jackson, A., and Suinn. (1985). Effect of individualized, nonindividualized, and package intervention strategies on karate performance. Journal of Sport Psychology, 7, 40-50. Taylor, J. (1996). Intensity regulation and athletic performance. In J.L. Van Raalte and B.W. Brewer (Eds.), Exploring Sport and Exercise Psychology, (pp. 3-24). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Terry, P.C. and Slade, A. (1995). Discriminant effectiveness of psychological state measures in predicting performance outcome in karate competition. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81, 275-286. Theeboom, M., DeKnop, P., and Weiss, M.R. (1995). Motivational climate, psychological responses, and motor skill development in children's sport: A field-based intervention study. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 17, 294-311. Weinberg, R.S. (1996). Goal setting in sport and exercise: research to practice. In J.L. Van Raalte and B.W. Brewer (Eds.), Exploring Sport and Exercise Psychology, (pp. 3-24). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Weinberg, R.S. and Comar, W. (1994). The effectiveness of psychological interventions in competitive sports. Sports Medicine, 18, 406-418. Weinberg, R.S., Seabourne, T.G., and Jackson, A. (1981). Effects of visuo-motor behavior rehearsal, relaxation, and imagery on karate performance. Journal of Sport Psychology, 3, 228-238. Williams, A.M and Elliott, D. (1999). Anxiety, expertise, and visual search strategy in karate. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 21, 362-375. Williams, A.M. and Grant, A. (1999). Training perceptual skill in sport. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 30, 194-220. Williams, J.M. and Leffingwell, T.R. (1996). Cognitive strategies in sport and exercise psychology. In J.L. Van Raalte and B.W. Brewer (Eds.), Exploring Sport and Exercise Psychology, (pp. 3-24). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles This site provides a number of resources to help you learn to manage anxiety. A good place to start is to understand your cognitive styles that contribute to how you manage anxiety. For milder forms of anxiety, you may be able to use these resources as self-help. For more severe anxiety issues, you may need support from a therapist. Resources Cognitive Styles Test Audios Articles Cognitive Diary Training Examples App: Stop Panic & Anxiety Self-help Audios Panic Assistance Mindful Grounding All panic audios Articles 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety How to Manage Panic and Anxiety All anxiety articles Audios The Worry Box Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Managing Insomnia Articles Coping With Change: Psychological Flexibility Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Questionnaire GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder Audios Social Anxiety Assistance Change Yourself--Don't Wait for the World to Change Self-esteem Articles Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Why Social Anxiety Disorder may be Created by Culture 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Audios Stress Education Quick Stress Relief Progressive Muscle Relaxation Relaxation Audios Articles A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help Too Stressed to Relax? When Stress Management Training in the Workplace Can Be Harmful Audios OCD Intrusive Thoughts Reassurance Excessive Responsibility and OCD Magical Thinking and OCD OCD Hoarding Assistance: What Is Your Life Worth? Articles 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Cognitive Diary Example: For OCD--What If I Forget to Lock My Doors? Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Social Phobia Audios Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Bouncing Ball Mindfulness All relaxation for children Cognitive Story: So Hard to Speak Up in Class All cognitive stories Articles How Effective is CBT for Children with Anxiety Disorders? Exposure Treatment of Simple Phobias in Children Audios Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Lies You Were Taught as a Child Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Building Blocks Emotion Training Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? When Everyone is Traumatized What Happens to Those Who Are Truly Suffering? Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "Individuals with an extreme degree of internal locus of control often have perfectionistic thinking as well...individuals with external locus of control are less likely to be successful because they don't make the effort." Tweet Internal Locus of Control Example Margie complained about being overworked both at home and at the office: Everyone relies on me and can't seem to make decisions on their own. However, as we explored this issue it became apparent that Margie didn't like to delegate and tended to take responsibility for everything, The best way to make sure something is right is to do it yourself. When we discussed the difficulty of delegating she indicated, I would delegate if they would take initiative and do things correctly without me having to re-do their work. As a result of needing to be in control, Margie was stressed and irritable. In addition, her family and employees didn't feel they could take the initiative without causing Margie displeasure. External Locus of Control Example Alan believed that if he didn't do well on a class assignment The teacher was grading unfairly or Everything goes wrong for me. His attitude with school was that no matter what he did, he didn't have control over the outcome. As a result, he tended to blame others or circumstances for his mistakes and failures. Internal Locus of Control Fallacy Margie's need for control was causing her undue stress. This type of control fallacy is an internal locus of control in which a person believes that success is based upon effort. Although nothing is wrong with this attitude at a moderate level, it becomes problematic when applied to situations in which a person doesn't have control. 1) Perfectionistic Control Individuals with an extreme degree of internal locus of control often have perfectionistic thinking as well. They tend to believe that there is a right way that things should be done. As a result, they may become easily frustrated when others don't share their perspective. In addition, they frequently believe that they can't rely on others to complete a task correctly. Therefore, as in Margie's situation, they may tend to do everything themselves to make sure it is right. Unfortunately, this form of control may lead to resentment because others aren't doing their share. Many times people in Margie's situation will find that others will tend to rely on them more and more. This dependency is in reaction to not feeling that they can capably handle a situation because the Margies of this world are looking over their shoulders and correcting mistakes before they have a chance to self-correct. So this internal control fallacy tends to cause problems for both the person who has the internal control issue as well as for others who may be associated with the person. 2) Caretaker Control Another aspect of internal locus of control is trying to solve others' problems. This individual doesn't want others to suffer, especially those they care about, so they try to control their lives. However, this can lead to resentment from those who are being controlled. They may not want to make the changes the caretaker has in mind for them. The caretaker needs to recognize that we can't be responsible for another person's feelings and problems in life. We can be reasonably supportive and helpful, but ultimately, we don't have control over another person's life experiences. In fact, we don't have the ability to determine what is right for another individual. For example, a parent may believe that a college education is necessary for success and may demand that a child attends college. However, perhaps that child is more interested and talented with mechanics. Who is right? External Locus of Control Fallacy The above example of Alan illustrates the external locus of control fallacy which is the tendency to believe that success is based upon luck, not upon effort. This individual will tend to believe that someone else is successful because He was at the right place at the right time or If I had the family connections she has I could have been a CEO as well. Thus, when a person has an extreme degree of external locus of control he or she will tend to not make an effort with tasks or to give up easily. They also tend to make excuses for not achieving success. Again, this attitude will affect others around them. For example, Alan may be the type of employee that would take advantage of Margie's over-responsibility and control. He may even tend to blame her for his failings If she would have provided better supervision, then this wouldn't have happened. Therefore, others will frequently be frustrated with someone with an external locus of control. Thus, individuals with external locus of control are less likely to be successful because they don't make the effort. In addition, they may be more likely to have conflict with others due to their attitude towards others. How to Change an Internal Locus of Control Fallacy 1) Focus on the Positive First, give yourself credit for being a person who is willing to take responsibility and who recognizes that effort leads to success. Appreciating these positive qualities allows you to realize that you don't need to change all aspects of the internal locus of control. However, two aspects need to be evaluated: being overly responsible and trying to control things that are not reasonably under your control. 2) Determine If You Have Control In fact, these two aspects are interrelated. I often tell clients, You can't be responsible for something over which you have no control. Therefore, the first step to dealing with the internal locus of control fallacy is to determine the degree of control you have. Too often, people inaccurately assess the degree of control they have. One way of determining this control is to ask yourself, Even if no one else did anything, can what I do make a difference? If not, then you don't have control. For example, a mother wants to make sure her college-age son is on time for school. If her son makes no effort, can her efforts to wake him up and remind him make a difference? Not likely, because he needs to be responsible for attending school. Now what she does have control over is what she is willing to do if he doesn't make the effort. No, I'm not willing to pay for school when you aren't taking responsibility for attending classes. 3) Determine How Much Responsibility is Reasonable If you determine that you do have a certain amount of control in a situation, the next step is to determine how much control or responsibility is reasonable. One of the basic principles I teach people is to not take more responsibility than the person they are trying to help. If I'm teaching a class, I have a limited amount of control over whether the students will learn anything, and with some students I may have no control. Therefore, I can be responsible for providing the class with information in an understandable manner and being available for questions or problems. But beyond that, the rest of the learning experience is up to the student. If I take too much responsibility and pursue a student trying to help improve his/her grades I may be making more effort than the student. In which case, I become frustrated and the student doesn't learn any more because he/she is not taking responsibility to learn. Over-responsibility for someone else tends to lead to co-dependent behavior in which the other person becomes less responsible and more dependent. How to Change an External Locus of Control Fallacy The external locus of control fallacy is often the more difficult of the two to change because it requires recognition of the irrational thinking. Yet the style itself tends to place blame elsewhere and not recognize responsibility for change. Typically, when I see clients who have this problem they have been strongly encouraged to seek therapy by someone else who may be negatively influenced by their behavior. For example, a wife may insist that her husband seek help because his attitude affects their marriage and her happiness. He may be perfectly content to continue with the external locus of control because it doesn't cause any immediate noticeable discomfort. Sometimes I will have clients who come to me with the complaint: I don't know how to be an adult. Everything was always given to me and I don't know how to be responsible. I can see how it might be causing problems at work. Typically, these individuals have learned an external locus of control because they had parents with an internal locus of control who took responsibility for everything and didn't have expectations for them. 1) Recognize the External Locus of Control So the first step is the recognition of the external locus of control. One way of recognizing it is by listening to the self-talk. If you frequently blame others or circumstances and if you tend to see success as due to luck or who you know, you are likely to have an external locus of control. You may also use the Perceived Control questionnaire to determine what type of control you have. 2) Recognize Importance of Effort The next step involves changing the words you use and recognizing the importance of effort and responsibility. Stop using the concept of luck as an explanation of behavior. It may be helpful to examine what has allowed people to be successful in life. If you pick up biographies of successful people, you will often see the themes of effort, determination, and responsibility reflected in their stories. For instance, Madonna didn't just happen upon her success but she was a hard-worker and a clever businesswoman who created her dreams. 3) Take Initiative Finally, quit making excuses and start asking yourself, What can I do to change this situation? Tell yourself that success is up to you. Tell yourself that you can't expect others to be responsible, that you must take the initiative to change your life and make it what you desire. Repetition As I've mentioned elsewhere, the way to change our thinking and the emotional and behavioral consequences of our thinking is through repetition. Once we have identified the rational self-talk that we want to engage in, we need to repeat it to ourselves frequently enough so that it becomes automatic. Once it becomes automatic you are well on your way to significant changes in your life. Copyright 2010/2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles My Chocolate Chip Cookie Diet: or, How to Lose Weight Without Deprivation by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The more you understand your psychological make-up and how your body responds, then you will be able to be successful in any goals you set for yourself." Tweet The hardest thing about dieting is the deprivation. It feels like we are being punished. No wonder so many people are unsuccessful with dieting if it has such a strong negative reaction. We aren't motivated by negativity except to move away from it. We are motivation to move towards things that feel good. Therefore, the secret to losing weight has to be in making it feel good. "How can I do that?" you ask because you associate the words "diet" and "bad." I don't have any miracle or new strategies to weight loss. What I am presenting in this article are the old tried and true techniques that have been shown through behavioral research to be effective. However, the title is true. You can lose weight without deprivation if you change some basic ineffective thought processes and behaviors. First, let me tell you a little of my story. I am a behavioral therapist and I have lost a hundred pounds using the methods that I will describe. And I did it while being able to eat my husband's fabulous chocolate chip cookies (he's the one who labeled this a chocolate chip cookie diet). The principles that I will be describing I am sure you have heard before. Also, what I am presenting isn't the only way to lose weight. In fact, what I am advocating is to take the methods that have been effective for other people and to adapt them to yourself. The more you understand your psychological make-up and how your body responds, then you will be able to be successful in any goals you set for yourself. The following are some ideas and techniques to consider in your plan. HAVE A DISCUSSION WITH YOUR PHYSICIAN If you have a great deal of weight to lose, it is important to have a discussion with your doctor, and not just for the usual reason of making sure you are healthy enough to manage exercise and weight loss. Your discussion with your doctor is also for the reason of determining whether there are any medical reasons that may have contributed to your weight gain. For instance, for myself, I already knew that I ate when I was stressed (most of my weight I gained during graduate school). What I didn't understand was why exercise, which is a great stress reliever, was so aversive to me. Then one day, I mentioned to my doctor that I was having breathing problems. I was afraid to say anything previously because I was sure he would say it was just because I was out of shape. Instead, he determined that I had asthma and gave me an inhaler. After my first use of the inhaler, I realized I had probably had asthma for a long time. In fact, I remember having chest pains and trouble breathing when I ran as a child; my mother told me it was growing pains. I now know that I probably had exercise-induced asthma, and naturally, I didn't like exercise because it was painful. Once I was treated for the asthma and was able to breath normally, I was able to start a successful exercise program. I am not saying that anyone who doesn't like exercise has asthma, but I do believe that the enjoyment of exercise is natural. In fact, research shows that when we exercise endorphins are released that are very pleasurable for us. If you find exercise aversive, it may be a good idea to determine if there is a reason. Other reasons include any illness that leads to fatiguing quickly such as anemia or allergies. Also, talk to your doctor about disorders that may lead to weight gain such as low thyroid disorders. START SLOWLY The advice that no one wants is that weight loss is a long-term project. Everyone wants to lose fifty pounds in the next three months so they look good for some particular event or just because they don't want to be on a diet for longer than three months. This attitude is a guarantee to long-term failure. An individual may lose weight in this manner but is not likely to keep it off because they have not made an important attitude change. That attitude change involves making a commitment to lifestyle changes instead of making a commitment to weight loss. The more you can learn to act "as if" you were normal weight and healthy, the more successful you will be for the long term. This means determining how physically fit people of normal weight behave and gradually incorporating these behaviors into your lifestyle. For instance, a person of normal weight may have a cookie for a treat, but they don't have a half dozen cookies. Starting slowly doesn't give the immediate gratification that our society thrives on. With my own situation, it has only been in the last year that people have really noticed my efforts and are complimenting my progress, but my commitment to lifestyle changes began ten years ago. At that time, my husband and I made an agreement to reduce the amount of fat in our meals by not frying foods as frequently. It was a simple step that wasn't very painful because I could still eat fried foods but not as often. Then about eight years ago, I started to exercise regularly. About five years ago, I quit eating fast food (however, I fell off the wagon for a little while). Two years ago, I decided to increase fiber in my diet. These are just a few of the changes I made over the years, but the culmination of these decisions led eventually to my weight loss. One significant realization for me was that I had gained weight slowly over the years. When I realized that it amounted to about an extra hundred calories a day, I thought I could surely halt the weight gain because eliminating a hundred calories a day couldn't be that difficult. All I had to do was eliminate a little butter on my morning waffles. Once I had achieved stopping the weight gain, weight loss wasn't any more difficult because it meant slight changes in my eating habits. The most difficult change for me was reducing the amount of milk I drink because I always loved a LARGE cold glass of milk with my meals or snacks; again, I just gradually reduced the milk rather than making a radical change that probably would have discouraged me. CHANGE PERFECTIONISTIC ATTITUDES The concept of starting slowing is one way of changing perfectionistic attitudes. These attitudes are typically self-defeating. In our society, we are bombarded with demands that we have to be perfect in every way: the perfect career, the perfect parent, the perfect body, etc. However, it is impossible for us to be perfect and if we try to achieve it, we will be guaranteed failure. Therefore, one of the first things you want to do is to identify self-defeating, perfectionist attitudes such as: "I have to lose 50 pounds in three months." "I have to exercise an hour a day." "I can't eat more than my allotted number of calories or fat grams." "I should look like a supermodel." "I should be able to leap over tall buildings and be faster than a speeding bullet." The problem with these attitudes is that they are all unrealistic. The more realistic your goals are, the more likely you are to be successful. For instance, when I first started exercising I was extremely out of shape; if I walked up a flight of stairs I would get out of breath so I tended to avoid stairs if there was an elevator nearby. My first exercise was on a stationary bike and I started with five minutes a day. I never could stick with exercise until I got rid of the attitude, "What's the use in doing anything less than an hour a day?" Instead, I told myself that anything was an improvement and would move me towards my goal of being physically fit. Speaking of the goal of being physically fit, I found that it was a better attitude to take than focusing on the need to lose so much weight. Generally, I was able to measure my increased fitness weekly by my ability to exercise longer and more intensely. Therefore, I was always achieving small goals. Making small goals is also an important attitude change. It is harder for us to say "I can't" when the goal is achievable. For instance, many of my clients complain that they don't have the time or energy to start exercising. I ask them, "Do you think you are capable of exercising for five minutes a day?" Invariably, they say "yes" and I tell them to make that their goal. By doing so, they can reward themselves daily for achieving these small goals rather than beating themselves up over failing to achieve a more difficult goal. Which brings me to the tendency of people with perfectionistic attitudes to focus only on outcome and not on process. They usually will look ahead to how far they have to go rather than back at how far they have come. As a result, they become discouraged, self-critical, and often quit. The more you focus on the process and give yourself reinforcement for each small achievement, the more successful you will be. EXERCISE, EXERCISE Many people don't want to hear that they need to exercise. However, this article is actually more about fitness than weight loss; the weight loss is just a byproduct of taking care of yourself. If you change just one thing in your life that can result in tremendous benefits, is literally the difference between life and death, it is to become more physically active. Exercise has been shown improve the health of your heart and lungs, it increases memory functioning, it improves sleep, it improves ability to manage pain, it increases energy level and reduces fatigue, it has been linked to reducing numerous other illnesses such as breast cancer, and it reduces depression and anxiety. I found that it was easier to add something into my life rather than taking something away such as depriving myself of food that I enjoyed. So I started with exercise and a commitment to increase my level of fitness. It has been found that making a commitment to exercise is more important than the length of exercise. If you commit to exercising daily if only for five minutes, in the long run you will be successful in making exercise part of your life. Sometimes I would tell myself I didn't feel like exercising but I would still exercise for five minutes because I had made that commitment to myself. Then, on some days I would stop after five minutes and on other days I found the energy to continue longer. MONITOR YOURSELF Behavioral research has consistently shown that monitoring our food intake has significant impact on how much we eat. However, the main problem with this approach is that it was so time-consuming. To do it correctly, a person had to write down every morsel of food, check the calorie charts, plan menus, and add up the daily calories. Naturally, anything taking so much effort has a high drop-out rate which certainly decreases its practical effectiveness. However, now with the advent of computer programs, there are easier ways of doing this. I found a program called Life Form that I used to help me keep track of my food intake and exercise. Initially, I bought it to help me increase fiber and decrease fat in my diet. But as I started using it, I found myself making overall healthier choices and my weight loss began in earnest. What I like about Life Form, in particular, is that it is easy to use (it takes me about 5 minutes a day) and it has graphs. I love graphs because they let me see what I have accomplished. In addition, this program allows you to graph anything you want and a side benefit I had was finding out that my irritability level definitely corresponded to my pre-menstrual days (in fact, I could pinpoint it to a particular day) which allowed my husband and me to take precautions to reduce arguments. The most important thing I found to make monitoring a success was to make a commitment to it. No matter what, I committed to putting my true food intake and exercise activities into the program. Since I didn't like to see the graph take sudden upturns, this commitment helped to keep me on track. WHAT ABOUT THE "WITHOUT DEPRIVATION" PART? I never felt particularly deprived because I set reasonable behavior changes. For instance, when I first started reducing calories, I started with a small reduction of 100-200 a day. This was such a small change that I barely noticed it, yet I started to see results. Then, as my body adjusted to the reduction in calories, I reduced may calorie intake another 100-200 calories. I continued to do this until I reached about 1500 calories a day; this occurred over a period of several months. In addition, I never forced myself to stick exactly to the 1500 calories but tried to average around the 1500 mark. I also let myself eat what I wanted on special occasions. Interestingly enough, I would look forward to a holiday such as Thanksgiving thinking that I would pig out only to find that my stomach would limit how much I could eat and I was satisfied with much less. Finally, I always tried to save enough calories for a special treat such as a chocolate chip cookie. By doing so, I never felt deprived and was able to stick to this plan for 18 months until I reached my goal. As I said before, I don't expect that everyone can use this same method successfully. But I encourage you to experiment and to learn what works for you. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Assertive Communication Index Assertiveness is the ability to actively problem-solve and to handle situations directly, calmly, and with confidence. The following are links to help improve assertive communication. Assertive Techniques Anger and Conflict Communication Passive-Aggressive Workplace Conflict Assertive Techniques Assertion 101: Remain Calm Assertion 101: The Importance of Eye Contact Assertion 101: You Have the Right to Say I Don't Care People-pleasing 101 Assertion 101: Don't Apologize for a Request Assertion 101: Just Say No Making an Assertive Complaint For Women Only: How to Have the Relationship of Your Dreams Anger and Conflict When Needs Come Into Conflict What to Do When Anger Hurts Those You Love What If You Considered Other Peoples' Views? Do You Understand Me? Conflict in Relationships When to Criticize Your Partner Communication In Praise of Specific Praise Be Careful Accusing Someone of Lying I've Been There Doesn't Always Mean I Support You Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Passive-Aggressive Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-Aggressive People Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Handling Passive-Aggressive Emoticons Index to Passive-Aggressive Examples Workplace Conflict How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Conflict in the Workplace Is Your Boss Unfair? What You Can Do About It Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Comments and Questions Policy Excel At Life is dedicated to "Pursuing Excellence in Life, Relationships, Sports, and Career." In keeping with this mission Excel At Life reserves the right to approve all comments and questions posted to this site. Guidelines for Approval 1) Respectful. When writing, keep a respectful tone and choice of words. Don't use all caps to yell at others on this site. 2) Should be helpful. The purpose of this site is to help people so only comments and questions that are considered helpful to others will be approved. 3) Not critical. Those who are asking questions on this site are genuinely desiring help. Being critical when giving advice or your thoughts about their situation is not helpful. 4) Consistent with the purpose of this site. Excel At Life teaches the cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods to help people make improvements in their lives. Comments that are inconsistent with these methods can be confusing to the users of this site. 5) No inappropriate content. Any language or content that may be disturbing to the users of this site will not be accepted. 6) No identifable information. Do not use full names of people or provide information that can identify them. 7) No links. Links to other content are not accepted and will be removed from otherwise acceptable comments. 8) Unreasonably critical of the content of Excel At Life. Excel At Life is a private site created for a specific purpose. Although other opinions within the confines of CBT are welcome, critiques considered confusing to the users of this site or are not helpful will not be approved. 9) No spam. Obviously, anything even remotely considered spam won't be approved. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Healthy Attitudes Towards Weight Management: Free Audios Creating Awareness of Overeating Consequences Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight Hot Air Balloon Motivation Risk and Planning for Success Creating Awareness of Overeating Consequences If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Hot Air Balloon Motivation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Risk and Planning for Success If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Creating Awareness of Overeating Consequences People may think about the long-term effects of overeating such as weight gain or health consequences, but this awareness often has little impact because it is too far into the future. This audio is about helping to create awareness of more immediate consequences when you are making decisions about what to eat. The more you practice this exercise to imprint the memory of the consequences in your brain, the more it helps to make better choices. About 11 minutes. TRANSCRIPT Listen Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight This audio teaches you about how to think about your body and weight in a different way. Instead of thinking of weight loss in perfectionistic terms that lead to a cycle of dieting and failure, you can learn to think about caring for your body and setting manageable healthy goals. The audio is meant to be listened to repeatedly so that the thinking style can become more automatic. About 13 minutes. Also, read article: Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight. TRANSCRIPT Listen Hot Air Balloon Motivation Although this audio uses imagery for relaxation and can be used just for the calming experience, the focus on the audio is encouragement and motivation. Once you achieve a state of relaxation, listening to the motivational statements can increase your self-confidence and belief in your ability to achieve your goals. This audio is meant to be listened to repeatedly to help increase your positive self-talk regarding achieving your goals. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Listen Risk and Planning for Success This audio discusses obstacles to success. In particular, it examines ways of thinking about risk that can interfere with success and points out the importance of planning to create a calculated risk that is more likely to lead to success. About 8 minutes. As with all the cognitive assistance audios, the more you listen to this audio, the more it creates a pathway in your brain related to success rather than focused on negativity. This audio can assist with a variety of goals whether athletic performance, weight loss, or career focus. TRANSCRIPT Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles When Anxiety Interferes with Performance: Transferring Practice by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet "One of the more difficult aspects of learning to manage anxiety is how to transfer what you have learned in practice to help with actual situations..." The following sport psychology question from a website reader regarding martial arts concerns how to transfer the practice of the cognitive-behavioral techniques to real-life situations. The following response not only applies to sport competition but also to other situations in which anxiety can interfere with performance (work, school, etc). Many times people have learned the techniques of challenging irrational thinking and of relaxation but have trouble using them when confronted with an anxiety-producing situation. When this is the problem, they need to learn how to transfer their practice to actual situations. Question: I practice meditation and cognitive rationalization and am fairly well versed in both, yet they don't seem to have a great effect on the automatic thoughts that occur when I'm in motion. I'm unsure how to connect the rational meditative mind state with physical movement. I write because of the increased tempo in cognitive function that I experience when fighting. As I try to do more, my tension grows as well. For example, if I throw three punches, with each punch my rate of thought increases resulting in increased tension and subsequent anxiety. Throughout my life there has always been this disconnect of mental relaxation while increasing physical exertion. It has stopped me from realizing many goals and is practically crippling me at this point in my life because of the resulting anxiety. Maybe I can harness anxiety into positive energy but I don't know if it's possible or how to. Answer: There are several issues to consider here. First, I suggest you read the following articles to fully understand my answer: Effects of Intensity on Performance and Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? One of the more difficult aspects of learning to manage anxiety is how to transfer what you have learned in practice to help with actual situations, in this instance, a sporting event. In this case, you already know the methods but can't utilize them when you need to. One reason this is more difficult in a sporting event is because of the increase in adrenalin due to the physical activity. Adrenalin causes increased thinking because it is preparing the body to react quickly. So this is actually a beneficial process. However, I assume that your thinking is tending towards irrational negative thinking rather than relevant beneficial thinking. A couple of methods can be used to help transfer what you have learned through meditation practice and regarding challenging the irrational thinking. These methods include practicing mindfulness and engaging in mental rehearsal. As I said earlier, these methods can be useful with many types of anxiety-producing situations, not just competition. 1) Mindfulness Practice. First, during martial arts competition, you obviously do not want to be completely relaxed. However, you want to create a state of flow which is the ability to react and respond almost without thinking (so they say). The fact is,though, you actually ARE thinking but it is a more automatic way of thinking in which you are mindfully aware of your opponent, are able to process what is occurring, and then react. This takes place very quickly and automatically so it appears to people as if they are not thinking. It is very similar to automatic driving. Many people believe that they are not thinking when engaged in automatic driving but that is not true. The brain is continually processing information and respondingwithout this thought process it would be impossible to drive. However, it appears effortless. That is the state very skilled fighters are able to achieve. Many people may develop this skill naturally with experience, but it can also be developed deliberately. What I would suggest to help develop this skill is that you want to learn to bring mindfulness generally into daily activities. The article on mindfulness that I suggested above describes a technique to help you do this. Mindfulness helps make the transition between the deep relaxation methods such as listening to an audio and everyday life. The more you practice mindfulness, the more you will be able to utilize it during competition. Many people I see think that they should just be able to be mindful or relaxed when they want to be: I tried deep breathing to relax, but it didn't work. However, they are missing the transitional practice of relaxation or mindfulness so they can use it in difficult situations. The brain doesn't just change automatic behavior because we tell it towe have to train our brains through practice to do what we want. 2) Mental Rehearsal. The other method to help you transfer your skills is mental rehearsal. One of the sports psychology audios I have created is the Sport Imagery Exercise which has you mentally rehearse your physical skills. However, in this case, we would actually modify it some. In addition to rehearsing the physical skill you need to rehearse the mental skills. You have already identified your irrational thinking and know how to challenge it. So what you do with this rehearsal is to imagine the self-talk that you want to engage in while competing. For instance, telling yourself to Stay focused or You can do this or whatever it is that you have identified that is important to your performance. This technique is one that I use for many types of anxiety problems because a person can't be expected to change their thinking in the midst of high levels of anxiety. But they can imagine the situation and practice the desired self-talk. With enough practice they will be able to more readily recall and use the new response in the high intensity situation. You might notice that this seems opposed to what I just described earlier about mindfulness and the flow state of automatic thinking. And you would be correct. However, this is a step in the process. It is better to have these positive thoughts to refocus your thinking than the negative ones. Actually, this technique eventually combines (after much practice) with the mindfulness technique to help create flow. If you read the mindfulness article, you understand that a core component of mindfulness practice is learning to redirect focus. So initially, you may use a statement such as Stay focused to help yourself redirect your focus back to your immediate experience, but eventually you are able to do that more automatically. I think these are the transitional methods that can help you harness the anxiety into positive energy. Let me know how it works for you. Copyright 2013 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Listen Free to OCD Audios OCD Intrusive Thoughts Reassurance Excessive Responsibility and OCD Magical Thinking and OCD OCD Hoarding Assistance: What Is Your Life Worth? Mindful Breathing OCD Intrusive Thoughts Reassurance If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Excessive Responsibility and OCD If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magical Thinking and OCD If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download OCD Hoarding Assistance: What Is Your Life Worth? If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mindful Breathing If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download OCD Intrusive Thoughts Reassurance This audio discusses the intrusive thoughts that occur with a certain obsessional type Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in which the individual is anxious or fearful due to experiencing unacceptable thoughts, images, or impulses. The purpose of this audio is to help the person with OCD understand that having such thoughts is normal and that worrying about the thoughts creates the obsessional process. Although this audio may provide reassurance for the individual who has such thoughts, it is meant to be a step in the treatment process and not relied upon solely for reassurance. The individual with OCD should try to make this a way of thinking so they can learn to dismiss the thoughts as other people do. TRANSCRIPT Listen Excessive Responsibility and OCD This audio discusses the concept of excessive responsibility to help those with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) challenge the underlying thinking of certain types of compulsions. Many people with OCD have problems with excessive responsibility because they want to control or prevent bad events. When you first listen to this audio it may be uncomfortable because it challenges irrational beliefs. However, if it seems relevant to the obsessions you have, it is best to listen to it repeatedly to help change the thinking. TRANSCRIPT Listen Magical Thinking and OCD This audio discusses the concept of magical thinking to help those with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) challenge the underlying thinking of certain types of obsessions and compulsions. Magical thinking involves a certain type of obsession that is very similar to superstitious thinking. It involves linking events that cannot logically be related to one another. Some forms of scrupulosity may involve magical thinking. Listen OCD Hoarding Assistance: What Is Your Life Worth? Obsessive Compulsive Disorder can involve different types of compulsive behaviors. This audio discusses the compulsion of hoarding which is the fear of losing something. The concept of hoarding and the thinking that needs to be challenged to help make choices regarding saving or throwing things away is discussed. This audio also describes how the fear of loss and grief is associated with hoarding. The purpose of this audio is to help you become more aware of the specific choice you are making when you engage in a hoarding compulsion. In particular, is the item you are saving worth more than you are? By being aware of this choice, you can take the next step of changing the behavior that controls your life. NOTE: This audio is not relevant for general issues of clutter and disorganization. It is specific to OCD. TRANSCRIPT Listen Mindful Breathing This audio is a quick three minute stress management technique that coaches you through mindful breathing. Mindfulness is a state of mind in which you focus completely on your most immediate experience. In this exercise, the focus is on the full experience of your breathing. When doing any mindful exercise, it is important to very gently bring your focus back to your experience if distracting thoughts occur. Do not try to get rid of the thoughts because that interferes with mindfulness. Instead, just gently refocus back to the exercise. Once you have learned this technique, you can use it to help with sleep when you are having trouble quieting your mind. Focus on the mindful breathing. Whenever any thoughts occur, gently bring your focus back to your breath. You may have to do this a number of times before your mind quiets. Once you are fully focused on your each breath, you are more likely to drift naturally off to sleep. Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Take a moment and write down or reflect upon all the thoughts that come to mind when you think about dieting or losing weight. Now note how many of those thoughts are negative. " Tweet Audios to help you change your thinking about taking care of your body: Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight. "I don't have any willpower." "I'm weak." "I'm lazy." "I can't do it." Do these statements sound familiar? Too often, our self-statements about weight management interfere with our efforts and lead to failure. By changing how we think about developing a healthy weight we are able to change the behaviors that can lead to success. Not long ago I conducted a little experiment with my cardio-kickboxing class. After an intense class I told them to get the heaviest weights they could curl 8-10 times. I spent a minute telling them to focus on feeling tired, that they had just worked out hard and they couldn't do anymore. Then, they were to curl the weights to exhaustion. Once they finished, I spent another minute telling them to focus on having energy, feeling good, feeling refreshed, and knowing they could do more. Once again, they lifted the weights to exhaustion. The results were that out of nine people, only one did fewer lifts the second time! And typically, when someone lifts weights to exhaustion they should not be able to lift as much the second time when it is only a minute later. Although this was not a controlled scientific experiment, it was a demonstration to my class to show how powerful our thinking can be. What this exercise showed was how positive thinking overcame the natural exhaustion of the body and created a self-fulfilling prophecy of lifting more weight because the participants believed that they could. How does this demonstration apply to achieving a healthy weight? Take a moment and write down or upon all the thoughts that come to mind when you think about dieting or losing weight. Now note how many of those thoughts are negative. Several typical categories of thinking emerge when people record their thoughts about dieting. These include perfectionistic thinking, negative evaluation and labeling, generalization, and focus on failure. By recognizing and changing these thought patterns you could be on your way to achieving and maintaining a healthy weight. Perfectionistic Thinking One of the most prevalent thought patterns about weight in our society is an over-emphasis on perfection. We are confronted repeatedly with the focus on beauty and thinness. Commercials, television shows, movies all have a preponderance of attractive people seeming to indicate such beauty is the norm. For instance, watch a TV show set on a beach in Florida and then go to the beach yourself. Do the people look the same? When I go to the beach I see people of all body types and sizes but on most television shows that is not what they show unless it is part of the story line. Especially notice how beautiful the women are on national television news shows these days; although the news has always emphasized attractiveness of the female anchor, it seems that they are now required to be a model first. So, all around us we are presented these images as if this is how we should look. No wonder we develop unrealistic expectations about our appearance. The problem with these perfectionistic expectations is that they are likely to sabotage any efforts we make towards maintaining a healthy weight. When demands are difficult or impossible to meet, we tend to take a defeatist attitude and quit. I can't look like that anyway, so why even try? In addition, perfectionism tends to be all-or-nothing so that if we evaluate our success according to whether we achieved the perfectionistic goal or not rather than evaluating success upon improvement. For instance, I knew a women who had successfully lost 85 pounds but because she didn't achieve her goal weight by the date she had set for herself she became discouraged and, quit dieting, and put half of the weight back on. Too often, when people want to lose weight they set extreme calorie limits and exercise goals that they are unlikely to meet. As soon as they fail one day, they give up. However, if we can focus on making small improvements that are realistic and manageable we are more likely to be successful. Also, we need to set goals that are not so concrete. Instead of I will exercise for an hour everyday we can state I will increase my activity level. Instead of I won't eat any sweets we can set a goal of I will thoroughly enjoy any treat I eat and not eat snacks mindlessly. Instead of I will restrict my calories to 1200 a day we can decide to write down whatever we eat so as to be more aware of food intake. Negative Evaluation and Labeling Frequently, people tend to overly focus on the negative when trying to change a behavior. We learn these attitudes from the messages around us and then they influence our behavior. For instance, at one time I used to believe the societal attitude of I'm weak and unmotivated because I was obese. As a result, I never set any realistic goals for myself regarding weight because I knew I would fail because I didn't have what it takes. Well, what I didn't have was a healthy belief system about myself and my weight problem. One day, however, I thought about that statement: I'm weak and unmotivated. As I thought about it, I began to realize how inaccurate it was. Other evidence in my life clearly indicated that I was motivated: I obtained a Ph.D., I had conducted and published research, I developed and ran a successful business, I was involved with my son's school and other interests. These certainly weren't indicators of an unmotivated person. I also realized I wasn't weak: I had confronted numerous personal stressors in my life and didn't back away from problems. So, based on this self-assessment, I changed my thinking to I have a problem with weight control. This thinking was not so global and overwhelming. It did not make me feel bad about myself generally because it was more specific and confined. Therefore, I was able to think of becoming more healthy in a manageable way rather than being overwhelmed with all the negative emotions related to I'm weak and unmotivated. Examine how you label and evaluate yourself by listing the thoughts you have about dieting, weight loss, or achieving a healthy weight. Then, ask yourself, Are these accurate statements? What evidence can you find from other areas of your life that show how these statements may be inaccurate? Then, determine what you can say to yourself instead that doesn't make you feel as bad. Finally, say it! As frequently as you can remind yourself of the accurate challenges: No, I'm not weak and unmotivated, weight loss is a difficult challenge for me. Generalization Many years ago when I taught a smoking cessation class, we explained to the students There is no failure as long as you keep trying. The more times you attempt to quit, the more likely you will quit. Too often, when people think about losing a weight they think, I've tried before. It's never worked. It won't work this time. So, why bother trying? And certainly, it probably won't work this time if we continue to generalize from past experiences. However, just because something hasn't worked in the past, doesn't mean nothing will ever work. Thomas Edison stated when working on his invention of the light bulb I have not failed. I just found 10,000 ways that won't work. If you have found ways that won't work, that doesn't mean that you will fail in the future. Try something else. Determine why something didn't work for you and change it. If your goal was too demanding, make it more realistic. If you can't give up chocolate, how do you fit it into your diet? If exercise is boring, how can you be more active in a fun way? Focus on Failure Although this concept is closely related to the perfectionistic thinking and the negative evaluation and labeling, it deserves a comment separately. In particular, people tend to focus on the outcome rather than on the process which allows a greater focus on failure. For instance, if you are trying to lose weight, a focus on the outcome is based on how much you gained or lost in a particular week. If you gained or the loss was not enough, you feel like you failed. I wanted to lose a pound, but I only lost a half pound. However, the focus on the process allows you to examine more of what you achieved: I have been eating healthier foods this week and not over-doing the snacks. This type of thinking is more likely to lead to continued effort as opposed to the focus on failure. Changing Thinking The key to changing thinking is to first be aware of your thinking. A useful technique is to write down the thoughts that you have regarding your weight and attempts to manage it. Then determine what type of thinking error may be involved: perfectionistic thinking, negative evaluation and labeling, generalization, or focus on failure. Once you have determined the type of thinking, you can then develop an evidence list that shows the inaccuracy of the thinking. This allows you to develop a rational challenge to the thoughts that you can use whenever they occur. By working on challenging your thinking you are likely to remove some of the roadblocks that interfere with achieving and maintaining a healthy weight. So much of our ability to achieve any goal starts with how we think of ourselves and our ability to succeed. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Stress Education If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Stress Education Stress is a common problem that can seriously impact health, sleep, and relationships. Many people believe they can't do anything about stress. However, they don't realize that how a situation is approached can change the impact of stress. This audio teaches you about the stress reaction, how it affects your body, and what can be done to deal with stress and to reduce its effects. You might not always have control over whether stressors occur, but you do have control over how you manage the stress you experience. TRANSCRIPT Listen Transcript: Stress Education Stress is a common problem. You can't escape being stressed because it comes with being alive. However, you can learn to cope with stress and reduce how much it affects you. And that it is what I'm going to talk about. First, however, let's take a moment to focus. Begin by just focusing on your breathing. Notice each breath you take and what it feels like as it comes into your body and as it leaves your body. Notice the changes in your muscles as you inhale and exhale. Notice that as your breathing slows and becomes more rhythmic your muscles begin to relax especially when you exhale. Allow yourself to continue this very natural breathing process as I talk to you about stress. Just that moment you took can help you focus a little better. Problems with focusing is one of the major effects of stress. The reason that focus is so affected is because when we are stressed we are not in a mindful state. We are distracted by thoughts that we can't act upon in the moment. Such as How can I ever get all this done? Or, I just can't deal with this. I'm too overwhelmed. Or, Why does life have to be so hard? Thoughts such as these take our focus which prevents us from fully focusing on what we CAN do. This audio is about learning how to deal with stress more effectively. That involves controlling what you can, using stress management techniques to cope with what you can't control, and changing the thinking that interferes with doing either of these things. First, however, it is important to understand stress and why you are affected. If you are affected by stress, it does not mean that you are weaker than other people because you can't cope. It means that you haven't LEARNED the skills to cope with stress. By learning the stress management skills as well as the cognitive thinking skills, you will learn to manage stress better. Stress is caused when demands are placed upon you that exceed your natural ability to cope. Stress is often perceived as negative because of the impact it has, however, the events that cause stress can also be positive. Any events, positive or negative, that provoke stress are referred to as stressors. So, even a person who just got a new job with an increase in salary and can afford to move to a new home is likely to experience stress even though the stressors are all positive. They might even have the additional stress of I should be happy. Why am I feeling bad? which typically doesn't occur with someone who has had negative events occur. How does the body cope with stress naturally? The body increases its defenses such as the production of cortisol which is often referred to as the stress hormone and the production of adrenalin which prepares the body to react quickly. These chemicals in our system actually help us to resist the stress and to cope by reacting to the event. In fact, during the resistance stage of stress, we are able to focus better, think more clearly, and respond more rapidly than normal. However, if the stressor continues, or there are numerous stressors during a period of time, this heightened state of readiness and preparation caused by these chemicals will start to exhaust the body. This is when the demands of the stressors begin to exceed the body's natural ability to cope and you will begin to experience the effects of stress. These effects include the inability to focus or think clearly, fatigue or exhaustion, physical symptoms such as headaches or body aches and pains, stomach upset or indigestion, sleep disturbance, over-eating or not eating, and emotional distress. If these symptoms become chronic, over time they can lead to depression and the inability to function effectively. In addition, there are long-term effects caused by the body's defenses. For instance, although the stress hormone cortisol is meant to help with stress, when a person is in a state of stress over a long time, the cortisol causes a build-up of fat around the middle of the body which is the kind that can contribute to heart disease and diabetes. Long-term adrenalin release can cause chronic agitation, irritability, gastro-intestinal distress, and sleep disturbance which can lead to problems with pain, digestion, and chronic fatigue. Obviously, as your own personal experience probably tells you, as well as the fact that the stressors can be positive or negative, there is no way to avoid the stressors. However, there are ways to help your body defend itself from the effects of stress. First, you need to identify when an event is controllable, partially controllable, or uncontrollable. Sometimes you might need to get other people's perspective on this because it might not always be clear to you when you are being stressed. If you determine that the event may be controllable, then do what you can to change the situation. For example, much daily stressed is caused by people trying to do more than is reasonable given the time they have. One good way of controlling this stress is by saying No when others make requests of you. You need to be in charge of your time or the demands upon you can become excessive. However, there are many stressors in life that are uncontrollable such as injury, illness, loss of a job. In these situations, you may not be able to change the cause of the stress, but you can change your reaction and not be as impacted by the stress. I'm not trying to say you won't be affected at all, but you can reduce the impact and improve your ability to cope with it. There are a number of reasons people may not use the tools that can help them cope with stress. The first of these is that they may not be familiar with the techniques of stress management. They might think that relaxing is sitting in front of the TV with a beer or a glass of wine. However, not only is that not effective stress management but it can lead to other stress such as not getting necessary things done or reliance on substances or even substance abuse. However, most importantly for our purposes, it is not effective stress management because it does not decrease the chemicals that are released by the body's defenses. You need techniques that HELP the body's defenses so that your body doesn't have to work as hard. In other words, you need to increase your body's natural ability to cope. The way you do this is by using techniques that have the effect of decreasing the cortisol, or stress hormone, release and that counteracts the adrenalin by releasing a calming chemical into your system. The techniques used in psychology are natural methods that will change this chemical response affecting how a person reacts at a physiological level. These techniques are fairly simple but need to be used consistently and frequently until they are a natural part of your routine. There are many different ways these techniques are modified and presented, but primarily, they involve mindful breathing and focus, muscle relaxation, and pleasant imagery. Similar to exercise, they need to be a lifestyle behavior to be effective. You can't just use a little breathing occasional when you are stressed and expect it to have a great impact. If you pay close attention to people who seem to cope well, they probably have relaxation practices built into their lifestyle, sometimes to the degree that they might not even be aware of their practices, but other times it may be a more deliberate routine. It is good to have a 20 to 30 minute deep relaxation practice every day, often before bedtime so that your sleep can be more restful. It is also important to practice quick stress relief exercises throughout the day. These quick techniques are more effective when you have been practicing the longer relaxation and know how your body responds. Even though these techniques are fairly simple and are pretty effective, the second reason many people don't use the techniques is because of time. They often state I don't have time to relax. I have too much to do. However, the truth is you don't have time not to relax. Stress takes time from you where relaxation gives you more time. What I mean by this can be illustrated by thinking of a time when you were in a hurry or rushed. Most likely, you were less careful and more likely to make mistakes causing you to take the time to correct them. Also, you were probably less focused causing you to not think as clearly and having to take more time to make decisions. In addition, you were probably more forgetful causing you to take time to remember. However, when a person is more relaxed, they are more mindfully focused which allows them to think more clearly, react more quickly, and to be more efficient. Therefore, taking the time to approach your day in a mindfully relaxed way will actually allow you to accomplish more in less time. Now, what I just did in discussing a different way of thinking about time is considered cognitive therapy which is learning to think in a different way. In this instance, it is taking an obstacle to stress management, time, and thinking about it in the sense of stress management gives you time rather than taking time. By thinking differently about dealing with stress we can begin to eliminate the obstacles that prevent self-care. Other obstacles people have may include thoughts such as It will take a lot of effort. Or, It will take time and won't do any good anyway. Or, I don't have the willpower or the discipline. Or, I don't have the energy. Each of these ways of thinking can be changed by looking at the situation differently. For instance, stress management may take effort but it doesn't take a lot of effort. Just listen to a relaxation audio. I tell my clients frequently that even if they feel they don't have time to fully focus, just let the relaxation audio play in the background while they are doing something else. Even doing this, they will probably get some benefit. If the problem is lack of confidence in your ability or in the techniques themselves, just try doing a little at a time. If you experience even a small amount of benefit for a short time, you may be encouraged to do more. The nice thing about some of the quick relief exercise is they can be done in a few minutes. In addition, once you learn more about mindfulness, you can learn to bring it into your daily activities. Mindfulness does not actually take time, it is more a state of mind of being fully focused on your immediate moment. Once you learn to do that, it will help you be less stressed and more focused and effective. If you give yourself the gift of 30 minutes a day to take care of yourself and use these techniques, you will be given much more than that in return. Now, let's just take a moment again to focus on your breathing. Allow yourself to notice each breath just as you did at the beginning. However, this time imagine that you are breathing energy into your body and letting that energy flow to all parts of your body. As you exhale, notice which muscles need to relax and allow those muscles to relax. Take this mindful focus with you throughout your day. Copyright 2012 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Questions and Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "The self-concept is a factual description of how you perceive yourself. If your perception is distorted, this description may not be an accurate depiction of you, but it IS an accurate statement of what you believe about yourself." Tweet Also read: 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem We all have a sense of self. Whether that sense of self is positive or negative is based upon our experiences in life and our perceptions and assessment of ourself. If our self assessment was always accurate, I would have no need to write this article. However, the problem is that our perception of ourself is often distorted. Previous experiences can distort this perception. For instance, a person growing up in a perfectionistic family may view herself as always falling short of the expectations of the family. As a result, no matter how successful she might be, she thinks of herself as a failure. Or a boy who is constantly picked on by his older brothers: "How stupid!" or "What a dork!" He may come to believe these labels about himself. Unfortunately, people who believe certain labels will often live up, or live down, to those labels. The labels can create a self-fulfilling prophecy of expectation. He expects himself to be stupid so he never tries to prove otherwise. WHAT IS SELF-CONCEPT? The self-concept is a factual description of how you perceive yourself. If your perception is distorted, this description may not be an accurate depiction of you, but it IS an accurate statement of what you believe about yourself. The self-concept is derived from self-esteem and self-efficacy. If a person has low self-esteem, the self-concept may be skewed in the direction of a negative description. Some aspects of the self-concept may be purely statements of fact such as "I have a college education" or "I don't dance" without any evaluation of whether it is good or bad. In fact, people with a good self-esteem and self-efficacy are often able to recognize their limitations without a judgment attached. For instance, "I don't have a good sense of direction" can be just a statement of fact without feeling good or bad about it. WHAT IS SELF-ESTEEM? Self-esteem is the regard or respect that a person has for oneself. A person with positive feelings regarding the self is said to have high self-esteem. However, self-esteem can refer to very specific areas as well as a general feeling about the self. For instance, a person may have low self-esteem regarding physical attractiveness and high self-esteem about ability to do a job well. WHAT IS SELF-EFFICACY? Self-efficacy is a person's belief in their ability to accomplish some specific goal or task. It generally corresponds to the level of competence an individual feels. Competence can vary from one situation to another. For instance, a person might feel quite capable competing in a particular sport but may not feel competent speaking in front of a group. As a result, overall self-efficacy may not be completely accurate as it is assessing an individual's general feelings of competence across a variety of situations or tasks. WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF LOW SELF-ESTEEM? 1) Feelings of unhappiness. People with low self-esteem are typically unhappy. Our sense of satisfaction and contentment with life is usually derived from how we feel about ourself. For some people, low self-esteem may contribute to depression and even inability to function in life. However, some individuals who derive their happiness from some other source such as spiritual beliefs may not find their degree of happiness impacted by the low self-esteem. 2) Feelings of anxiety. Many people with low self-esteem experience anxiety, especially social anxiety. Frequently, this is a consequence of the social evaluative aspect of self-esteem. In other words, we tend to evaluate our self based upon comparisons to other people. In addition, many people are concerned about others' evaluating them and assume that others will see the same flaws and incompetencies that they see within themselves. Such a concern leads to the feelings of anxiety. 3) Feelings of inferiority or superiority. Most people who have low self-esteem feel inferior to others. They believe that they don't measure up to some standard that others meet. Frequently they feel that some flaw within them means that they are not worthwhile or deserving. For many people I have worked with this flaw is not something visible to others but something magnified by the person with low self-esteem due to past experiences. For example, a person who believes she is selfish because that is what she was told as a child although her behavior as viewed by others may be quite giving and compassionate. Some people with low self-esteem may present an air of superiority. However, this may be a way of covering how they truly feel about themselves. Or, individuals who have low self-esteem but are perfectionists due to their concern about what others may think of them may appear to others as thinking themselves superior. However, don't make the common mistake and assume that all feelings of superiority are due to low self-esteem. There is another category of people who actually feel they are superior to others, intellectually, financially, or spiritually. However, this group is not the focus of this article. One way to make the distinction is that people who have low self-esteem and feelings of superiority will often have other characteristics of low self-esteem such as unhappiness or anxiety. 4) Impatience or irritation with self or others. Another characteristic of low self-esteem is a tendency to be impatient or easily irritated by mistakes, flaws, or inadequacies. Most frequently this is directed at the self but it can also be directed at other people. 5) Externally oriented goals. Individuals with low self-esteem often determine goals and direction in life based upon what others might want or need. They often feel that their needs or desires are unimportant. Such an attitude can lead to resentment due to always taking care of others while their needs are not addressed. 6) Negativity. Low self-esteem tends to lead to negativity. This negativity may not always be externally observed but internal self-talk is usually negative. Also, external manifestations such as criticizing oneself to others or excessively apologizing or commenting about negative observations may be noticed by others. Unfortunately, people tend to avoid individuals who are excessively negative which can reinforce the low self-esteem. WHAT ARE CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH SELF-ESTEEM? To clearly define the characteristics of high self-esteem, I need to make the distinction between an artificially inflated self-esteem and true self-esteem. An artificially inflated self-esteem is an effort to appear to have high self-esteem. However, such individuals don't typically show the following characteristics of people with high self-esteem. Individuals with low self-esteem may have some of the following qualities as well but those with high self-esteem have these characteristics in abundance and with consistency. 1) Responsibility. Since individuals with high self-esteem can accept themselves completely they are able to take responsibility for themselves and the consequences of their actions without being excessively critical of themselves. Therefore, they are readily able to acknowledge mistakes and accept limitations. 2) Goal commitment. Those with high self-esteem tend to have a strong sense of purpose and are committed to goals in life. In addition, they tend to be persistent in achieving these goals as they commitment does not fluctuate based on success or failure. As active participants in life they tend to strive for excellence not for perfection. 3) Genuineness. People with high self-esteem can be honest with themselves and others both emotionally and intellectually. As they aren't fearful of others truly knowing them, they tend to be genuine in their interactions with others. 4) Forgiving. High self-esteem tends to correspond with tolerance and acceptance of limitations. As a result, people who have high self-esteem are forgiving of themselves and others. 5) Internal values. Individuals with high self-esteem tend to have internally-based values rather than externally-based values. In other words, they have a strong identity based on chosen values rather than values they believe due to the demands or expectations of others. This type of identity is usually considered an "achieved identity" in which a person has analyzed their beliefs and values to decide the set of internal principles or values that they will adhere to. 6) Positivity. People with high self-esteem are positive with an appreciative and grateful attitude towards life. They can freely praise themselves and others and tend to look for the positive aspects of life and not dwell on the negative. 7) Self-improvement. Generally, there is a strong tendency to strive towards self-improvement among those with high self-esteem. As they don't view the need for self-improvement as a negative quality they are able to examine themselves uncritically. In addition, they can ask for help as needed because they don't view the need for help as shameful or negative. WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF LOW SELF-EFFICACY? 1) Fear of risks. Individuals with low self-efficacy see themselves as unable to be successful. As a result, they are often unwilling to take risks or try new things because they are convinced that the result will be failure. This is particularly unfortunate because the main way to increase self-efficacy is through practice and experience. 2) Fear of uncertainty. Low self-efficacy often is related to self-doubt and uncertainty. The individual doesn't want to try without a guarantee of success. As a result, they may never discover things at which they could be successful. 3) Feelings of failure. Those with low self-efficacy frequently have feelings of failure. As indicated above they might avoid or not try new things due to the risk involved. Or, they might only try something half-heartedly. As a result, they are less likely to experience success and more likely to see themselves as a failure. 4) Impression management. Impression management is the attempt to control how others might perceive you in order to be seen more positively. People with low self-efficacy feel they are not capable but may try to present a successful and competent image to others. They may put a great deal of energy into behaving in a way to obtain approval from others and experience a great deal of worry about being found out to be a fraud. For instance, they may try to hide mistakes from others rather than learn from them which prevents them from increasing their sense of self-efficacy. WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH SELF-EFFICACY? 1) Self-confidence. One of the most obvious characteristics of high self-efficacy is self-confidence. They approach tasks or situations with a sense of their ability to be successful. This self-confidence tends to lead to more experience which increases their ability which leads to greater self-confidence. This positive cycle lends itself to increasing self-efficacy even further. 2) Accurate self-evaluation. Individuals with high self-efficacy tend to be able to accurately evaluate their performance. They are neither overly-critical nor overly positive but are able to examine themselves realistically in order to pursue self-improvement. 3) Willingness to take risks. Those with high self-efficacy are willing to take risks because they understand that taking calculated risks increases the chances of success. As they are not fearful of failure or mistakes, reasonable risks can only increase self-efficacy. 4) Sense of accomplishment. Generally those with high self-efficacy feel a sense of accomplishment because they are often more successful due to the willingness to take risk and to pursue interests. Even if they fail or make mistakes they feel a sense of accomplishment because they view mistakes as opportunities to improve themselves. HOW CAN SOMEONE HAVE A GOOD SENSE OF SELF-EFFICACY BUT LOW SELF-ESTEEM? Self-efficacy and self-esteem are similar concepts but they are not the same thing. They do tend to correspond so that a person who is low in one is more likely to be low in the other. But it is also possible to have low self-esteem and yet have high self-efficacy. In fact, since I work with a lot of perfectionists I see this combination frequently. Therefore, someone may tend to be overly-critical and negative about himself and yet see himself as quite capable in certain areas. For instance, he might see himself as uninteresting and unlikeable but see himself as a competent architect. This occurs frequently with perfectionists because they are often competent at tasks with clear guidelines but feel uncertain in situations without clear "rules" such as relationships. HOW CAN SELF-ESTEEM BE IMPROVED? 1) Eliminate negative self-talk. First and foremost, people with low self-esteem need to eliminate harmful self-talk. The negative labels and frequent self-criticism can only cause further damage. Eliminating negative self-talk doesn't mean you can't recognize and address problems, but it means to be careful about how you talk to yourself and to not be self-destructive. 2) Recognize strengths. Those with low self-esteem tend to focus on their weaknesses rather than focusing on their strengths sometimes claiming that there isn't anything positive they can say about themselves. That is unlikely to be true. It is important to pay attention to strengths and to appreciate the strengths no matter how small they may seem. Once you recognize the strengths you need to reinforce the strengths through frequent focus on them. 3) Recognize self-worth. It is important to recognize that you are a unique human being and have worth. Recognize that you deserve to take care of yourself and set limits. You deserve respect and to be treated well. Again, you need to frequently reinforce this idea by continuing to focus on your self-worth. 4) Accept mistakes. Recognize that mistakes and flaws are part of the human condition. They don't make you less than others. Instead, you are like everyone else. You have flaws and you make mistakes. The more actively you are involved in life, the more mistakes you will make. But being actively involved allows you more opportunity for success as well. Accept yourselfflaws and all. 5) Accept rejection. The more you can believe that everyone doesn't have to like you, the less you need to feel bad or be ashamed of your imperfections. No one can be liked by everyone! It is an impossible task. However, the person with low self-esteem often feels a failure if someone is disapproving or rejecting. Instead, congratulate yourself if someone doesn't like you because you are being a genuine person. HOW CAN SELF-EFFICACY BE IMPROVED? 1) Develop skill set. The most important way to improve self-efficacy is to develop the skill set you need to be effective. If you are having trouble being successful in your work, identify your areas of deficit and determine what you need to do to improve. Ask others to honestly evaluate your skills and to give specific advice regarding improvement. Once you know what you need to do, then you need to do it again and again until you feel competent. That's how competence develops. People aren't born with competence, they have to learn and practice in order to become competent. 2) Modeling. One way to learn the necessary skills is to observe others. You can observe successful completion of tasks to learn how to achieve success. When you observe others being rewarded for their performance or successful completion of a task, you are more likely to be able to model yourself after their behavior. 3) Focus on specifics. To improve self-efficacy, it is best to focus on specifics. If someone gives you general feedback especially if it is negative you are less able to make changes than if someone can provide specific feedback. For instance, if you want a child to learn how to do dishes you don't say These dishes aren't clean, instead you say Let me show you how to load the dishwasher to get the best results. 4) Reinforcement. The more behavior is reinforced, the more likely it will continue. If you want to improve your self-efficacy focus on what you do well and reinforce it by giving yourself specific praise. DON'T MISTAKE POSITIVE THINKING FOR CHANGING THINKING. A common error that people make when trying to increase self-esteem or self-efficacy is what I call the "Saturday Night Live" phenomenon. Most people are acquainted with Al Franken's rendition of Stuart Smalley's self-improvement statements: "I'm good enough, I'm smart enough, and doggone it, people like me!" The problem with this type of positive thinking is that it is not believable, therefore it cannot change the self-esteem. My challenge as a therapist working with people with low self-esteem is to develop believable statements. Otherwise my clients are likely to respond with "You're just saying that because you are my therapist." If I make a statement that is believable they are more likely to accept it and use it. And, very simply, a believable statement is one that is true. So the challenge for you in improving your self-esteem is to develop believable statements. Telling yourself "I'm wonderful in every way" is not likely to help. However, you are more likely to change self-esteem if you are able to identify particular strengths such as "I'm a person who is willing to learn about myself and make improvements" or "I have courage because I am facing something that is very difficult for me" or "I am persistent. Even though happiness has eluded me I keep trying." Notice with these statements there are specifics attached to them. They are not general and overly positive. Instead, the statements are realistic with specific reasons why they are true. To change self-esteem, it is necessary to create these types of statements. So, how is this done? STEPS TO CREATE BELIEVABLE STATEMENTS 1) Write a negative statement you use to describe yourself. Try to be as fully descriptive as possible with the statement. 2) Identify what is true and what is false about the statement. People will often have difficulty with this step because they don't fully expand the statement. As a result the statement may appear to be true on the surface when it is actually false. Such statements are false because they are implying more that what is actually being stated. So, for example, if you write "I'm fat" you might argue "That statement is true. According to the standards of obesity, I am fat." However, more is being implied by the statement. If this statement affects how you feel about yourself, then your full statement is probably something like "I'm fat and I'm undesirable because I'm fat" or "I'm fat which means I'm weak-willed" or "I'm fat and worthless." As you can see, when the full statement is written out, then it is possible to identify what is true or false about the statement. For example, many people are fat and yet are still desirable. In fact, when I ask people "Have you ever known an overweight woman who is so confident and engaging that she attracts men like flies to honey?" most people respond "Yes, I have." Therefore, we have just demonstrated that being fat doesn't in and of itself cause a person to not be desirable so the idea that being fat makes you undesirable is false. However, the belief that you are not desirable because you are fat is likely to cause you to be undesirable because that belief affects how you relate to others. 3) Re-write your statement using facts. Once you have determine what is false, leave that part out of your statement and add in what is true. Also, it is best to not use negative labels because of what they imply. Instead of using the word "fat" use "overweight" or instead of "stupid" use "lack knowledge." Instead of saying "I'm fat (and all that implies)" you can say "I may be overweight but I present myself well." Or, "I might lack knowledge about that subject but I'm still an intelligent person." 4) Evaluate the statement. A well-written statement should be something with which you can agree or believe, and yet, it makes you feel good about yourself. Once you have evaluated the statement you can use it as an affirmation to help improve your feelings about yourself. The more frequently you use the affirmation, the more quickly you will come to see yourself that way. And the more believable the affirmation, the more likely you are to use it. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Emotion training teaches rather than demands. Emotional mastery is the ability to understand and interpret emotions accurately as well as to regulate emotions when they interfere with a person's goals." Tweet Emotion training may seem odd to some people: But it's what I feel! How can I make myself feel different? It also seems contrary to the idea that all emotions are valid and okay. On the surface, the method of emotion training seems to be no different from the demands of others: Get ahold of yourself! You're so emotional! You're too sensitive. Can't you control yourself? Stop crying! How is emotion training different? The difference, however, is that emotion training is not focused on blaming the individual. Instead, it teaches methods of evaluating and managing emotions. Several basic principles make it different from the demand to control emotions: 1) Emotions are not a weakness. Emotions are a necessary and important part of the human condition. Sometimes emotions are more intense than a situation usually stirs up but that doesn't mean the person is weak. Some people are more emotionally sensitive but that is often a good thing because usually they are more empathetic and compassionate as well. But sometimes people may need to contain the emotions and emotion training helps to do so. 2) Emotions are for the benefit of the individual. Most of the time, containment of emotions is not for other people and making them feel more comfortable. I say most of the time because sometimes it may be necessary when involved with vulnerable others such as children. However, generally, expression of emotions and emotion management are for your own purposes. 3) Emotions have a purpose. The method of emotion training values and validates emotions. By recognizing the importance of emotions it helps to put them into perspective and to use them for a purpose. Sometimes the purpose is a message such as Something about this situation makes me uncomfortable and I need to evaluate it. Other times it may be for a release such as when a person is grieving. 4) Emotional mastery can be taught. Emotion training teaches rather than demands. Emotional mastery is the ability to understand and interpret emotions accurately as well as to regulate emotions when they interfere with a person's goals. Most people already do this at times. For instance, have you ever been angry with someone and in the middle of an argument receive a phone call? Most likely, you don't answer angrily What do you want?! but with a pleasant tone Hi, how are you? So emotion training teaches a person how to use this skill when it benefits them. What is emotion training? Emotion training is a CBT method that teaches emotional mastery. It requires several steps that all build on one another. For instance, it is not possible to regulate emotions without being able to understand and evaluate the emotions. So, for a person to fully benefit from the emotion training exercises, it is best to learn the following steps in order. Also, notice that none of the following steps indicate that a person should ignore emotions. Instead, the idea is to use emotions to manage life situations in the best possible way. Ignoring emotions is just the flip side of being ruled by emotions. Emotions help us to evaluate situations, make decisions, and problem-solve. But they are meant to be used in partnership with our reasoning ability. So, emotion training involves learning to understand and decipher emotions, evaluating emotions for evidence and accuracy, and regulating emotions when desired. Step 1: Understanding emotions When people have had their emotions invalidated all their lives they often don't have a good understanding of their emotions. They often don't know how to recognize the subtle variations in intensity levels such as indifference, frustration and rage can all be manifestations of anger whereas boredom, homesickness and despair can all be aspects of sadness. The more a person understands emotions, the more s/he can put them into perspective. It is best to identify emotions more specifically. This is helpful to yourself as well as when communicating with others. I am disappointed is more specific than I am sad. The Cognitive Diary app has a feature that helps a person determine emotions based on the general category of emotion as well as the intensity level. If a person isn't certain about an emotion, it can be helpful to ask trusted others. Step 2: Evaluating emotions When a person accepts an emotion without evaluating it, they are engaging in emotional reasoning: If I feel it, it must be true. Emotional reasoning is the cognitive style that is most often the culprit when emotions take over. It is manifested in many ways with the different emotional disorders: 1) Panic Disorder: If I feel like I'm dying, it must be true. Many of the symptoms of panic can feel awful but it doesn't mean the person is suffering a fatal malady. 2) Depressive Disorders: If I feel that nothing will be pleasurable, it must be true. Research has shown that when people who are depressed engage in activities that have been pleasurable in the past, they are likely to feel better. However, due to emotional reasoning, a person who is depressed doesn't believe this can be true and it is difficult to get them to do things they usually have enjoyed. 3) Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: If something feels dangerous, it must be true. Many people with OCD are fearful of various dangers. For instance, not washing their hands may lead to serious illness or not checking the lights and electrical appliances when they leave the house may lead to a fire. Danger for them is due to an over-estimation of probability which leads to anxiety. The feeling of anxiety convinces them that their belief is accurate. 4) Post-traumatic Stress Disorder: If I feel out-of-control, I must be. When a person is overwhelmed by the emotions of a trauma, they often feel they can not gain control of these emotions. 5) Generalized Anxiety Disorder: If I'm worried about something, there must be a reason. People who worry tend to attribute a higher degree of probability to their worries occurring. The act of worrying gives validity to the feared event. 6) Borderline Personality Disorder: If I feel rejected and abandoned, it must be true. When conflict occurs, a person with BPD may not recognize the signs of acceptance or overtures of friendship or attempts at conflict resolution. As a result, they continue to feel rejected and abandoned even when the other person may not intend to. Although all emotions are important and have a purpose, emotions aren't always accurate. For instance, an emotion may be a reflection of a past experience, so the purpose could be a warning to evaluate a similar situation in the present. It doesn't mean the situation is the same but that it requires investigation. Evaluating the emotion allows a person to: 1) Determine what the purpose of the emotion is. Although the purpose of emotions may not always be clear, they have a purpose. However, the surface reaction may not always be the most accurate interpretation of the purpose. By sitting with the emotion and examining it, the purpose can become more apparent. 2) Determine if there is evidence. Not all emotional reactions are accurate. For instance, the feeling of rejection is notorious for being out of proportion to the situation. So it is necessary to look for tangible evidence, not just the feeling. 3) Determine if the emotion is based on the present situation. Sometimes emotions may be displaced from a similar situation in the past which causes a person to react as if it were the same. It is important to be aware of your triggers and recognize when the present is different. 4) Determine if the emotion is the most specific and accurate interpretation. Understanding the nuances of emotion and being more precise about the description of the emotion can help contain emotional reactions. Not all anger is the same: frustration is different than rage. 5) Determine if the intensity of the emotion is appropriate to the situation. Although the emotion may be accurate, sometimes the intensity may be influenced by other things such as physically feeling out of sorts. Other cognitive styles can also lead to emotional reactions. To learn more about your cognitive styles, take the Cognitive Styles Test. Step 3: Regulating emotions Emotional mastery is different than controlling emotions because it is based on a decision regarding the emotion. Sometimes the experience and/or expression of emotion is beneficial to the individual and sometimes it is not. However, the person with the emotion is the one who determines this. Through the process of understanding and evaluating the emotion, the individual can then decide what needs to be done to mange the emotion. For instance, if anxiety is causing the person to avoid situations that interfere with life functioning, s/he may decide to focus on calming the anxiety. However, if a person is grieving, s/he may decide to fully feel and release the emotions. Yet, there are times when a person may recognize that the emotion is not consistent with the evidence of the situation but it may be difficult to reduce or change the emotional reaction. The emotion training audios help to teach this ability: 1) Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma audio. Grounding is an important skill when emotions are intense. The purpose of grounding is to get in touch with the here and now primarily in a physical way. For instance, touching the furniture in the room. 2) Building Blocks and Rainbow Emotion Training audios. These are are associational audios that are based on Pavlov's concept of classical conditioning: when two things are paired together one can trigger the other. For instance, Pavlov noticed that the preparation of food triggered the involuntary reflex of salivation in dogs. In other words, what seems to be a response not under conscious control (salivating) can be elicited by pairing it with something else (the sound of food being prepared). If a reflex such as salivation can be conditioned so can emotions. These audios pair colors or images with certain emotional states. By listening to them repeatedly those colors or images can trigger the desired emotion. For instance, the Building Blocks audio allows you to create images of rooms that affect emotional states such as allowing you to feel in control or find comfort when you are sad. Once you have created these images you can use them to access these emotional states when you need to. 3) Mindfulness audios. Mindfulness methods also help with emotional mastery. Again, instead of getting rid of emotions, mindfulness allows you to just be with the emotions. By doing so, it helps create greater understanding and tolerance of the emotions. Copyright 2017 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Conflict Resolution Articles How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Describes personality styles that are resistant to bullying and suggests ways to learn from these styles to manage and resist bullying. Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Recognize how passive-aggressive behavior can create problems in relationships and learn how to change it. What If You Considered Other Peoples' Views? Discusses the biases that interfere with listening and suggests methods for active listening. 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-Aggressive People: Introduction Describes practical and effective ways of handling passive-aggressive behavior. Learn how to use the rules and methods to deal with PA people Rule 1. Identify type of PA behavior - malicious or unintentional Rule 2. Recognize when you need to address your thinking or behavior Rule 3. Always remain calm. Rule 4. Withhold the PA person's reward Rule 5. Choose your goal Rule 6. Choose your words carefully Rule 7. Be assertive Method 1. Active listening technique Method 2. Laugh and agree technique Method 3. Questioning technique Method 4. The broken record technique Method 5. Direct confrontation Method 6. Consequences to behavior Method 7. Reward desired behavior Method 8. Be passive-aggressive When Needs Come Into Conflict A common source of conflict is when people have opposing, but valid, needs. What to Do When Anger Hurts Those You Love Explains how anger is reinforced biologically and how the CBT methods can help change the process. Conflict in the Workplace Discusses how to resolve problems at work. For Women Only: How to Have the Relationship of Your Dreams When women learn how to be more direct about their needs they can develop more satisfying relationships. Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! - Introduction Understanding the reasons for hurtful behavior can lead to greater resolution of problems in relationships. Reason 1: Lack of Skills/Knowledge or Awareness Reason 2: Miscommunication/Misunderstanding Reason 3: Misdirected Intentions Reason 4: Self-protection Reason 5: Reactive Meanness Reason 6: Mental Disturbance Reason 7: Feelings of Superiority Reason 8: Pleasure-seeking Conclusion: Protect yourself by not personalizing mean behavior Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Discusses the normal grief process and how it impacts forgiveness. Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People The passive-aggressive style of communication can cause considerable problems in relationships. Co-Dependency: An Issue of Control Defines co-dependency and the problems that can occur in this unhealthy relationship style. When You Have Been Betrayed Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles DEPRESSION IS NOT SADNESS by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The tendency, then, is to assume that clinical depression is just extreme sadness or the inability to handle normal stress and sadness of life... This assumption is not only wrong but it is a disservice to all individuals who experience one of the clinical forms of depression..." Tweet A serious problem exists with the public's understanding of depression. The problem occurs because of the clinical term "Major Depression" and the general use of the word "depression." One of the definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary indicates that depression is "a state of feeling sad." Therefore, the general public typically defines "depression" interchangeably with "sadness" as in "I'm so depressed today." The tendency, then, is to assume that clinical depression is just extreme sadness or the inability to handle normal stress and sadness of life. This assumption is not only wrong but it is a disservice to all individuals who experience one of the clinical forms of depression: Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder, Depression NOS (Not Otherwise Specified), or Adjustment Disorder with Depression. With each of these disorders, the symptoms manifest with varying degrees of intensity and cause varying amounts of dysfunction. However, to simplify this discussion we will focus primarily on Major Depressive Disorder and Dysthymic Disorder. The hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder is the amount of daily dysfunction that it causes. A person with this disorder may be unable to work, go to school, or socialize. Sometimes they are unable to engage in basic self-care routines such as showering or taking their medicine. Most frequently, severe sleep disturbance is present along with eating disturbance particularly lack of desire to eat. The individual reports extreme fatigue, dysphoria (low mood), and lack of interest in usual activities. The most serious symptom of Major Depressive Disorder that is frequently present is suicidal ideation (wishful thoughts of death) which is sometimes present with suicidal intention. To diagnose Major Depressive Disorder, the above symptoms must be present a minimum of two weeks. Dysthymic Disorder is less well-known among the general public but often more problematic due to the lack of understanding as a result of the lower intensity of symptoms. Dysthymic Disorder is a low-grade but chronic depression. The extreme dysfunction characteristic of Major Depressive Disorder is not present but the chronic nature indicates that the mild to moderate depressive symptoms have been present for a minimum of two years. How do these depressive disorders differ from a normal state of emotion? One of the predominate differences from normal emotion is that depression typically is more of a numbness of emotion rather than an expression of emotion. In fact, in many cases, if significant active emotion is present such as frequent crying the individual may be more likely dealing with the normal emotions of grief or loss. However, this can become confused due to the accurately perceived loss an individual feels when suffering from the depressive disorders. In other words, a person suffering from depressive symptoms may also feel grief because the depression has imposed limitations and losses upon his/her life. For example, a woman's husband may leave her because he can no longer tolerate her inability to take care of herself, her sad and irritable mood, and her lack of interest in life. As a result, she not only experiences a depressive disorder, but she also experiences grief due to the losses caused by the disorder. Another key difference between depressive disorders and normal emotions is that the core symptoms of depression are physical. The individual's physiology is in a lowered, or depressed, state. The best way to describe this state for someone who hasn't experienced it is to imagine when you have had a low-grade virus that causes general fatigue, a feeling of malaise (bodily discomfort or unease), slower thought processing, lack of interest in usual activities, lack of appetite, and excessive sleeping or inability to sleep. These symptoms are similar to what a depressed person feels continually without relief. Now imagine that no matter what you do, those symptoms don't dissipate over time. The inability to change those core symptoms often lead to the secondary symptoms including frustration, hopelessness, feelings of failure and behaviors including social isolation, avoidance of many activities, and lack of motivation. In addition, sleep disturbance is a central feature of most depressive disorders, particularly Major Depressive Disorder, whereas normal emotions don't tend to effect sleep for significant periods of time. Even though intense grief may disrupt sleep patterns temporarily, it does not tend to be as intense or chronic as the sleep disturbance with Major Depressive Disorder. Finally, normal emotion does not cause the severity of disruption to normal daily activities particularly not for any prolonged period of time. The individual remains able to engage in normal work or school-related activities. Even intense grief from uncomplicated bereavement does not tend to cause serious disruption to necessary activities for longer than a couple weeks. A person may not desire to engage in most activities but they have the ability to do so. Why is it important to differentiate depressive disorders from sadness? Most of the clients I treat for depressive disorders also feel guilty due to the belief that they "should" be able to handle their emotions better. After all, "other people are able to handle loss, grief, sadness." They reason that if they are so seriously affected they must be weak-willed or not trying hard enough. These feelings of guilt only serve to make the individual worse due to feelings of inadequacy. To refer again to the above analogy of being sick with a low-grade analogy, imagine that not only are you suffering due to the illness but you also believe that you are sick because you didn't take care of yourself well enough, you didn't exercise enough or eat the proper foods. Now, you might react to these statements by saying "That's ridiculous! Sometimes you can do all the right things and you still get sick!" And that is exactly my point. An individual with a depressive disorder doesn't have any more control over the illness of depression than someone with a virus; there are health practices that are beneficial but such practices don't eliminate illness completely. Another critical reason to differentiate depressive disorders from normal emotion is that others often blame the individual with depression. "If only you would look at things more positively" or "If you'd just get out and do things" or "You can do this, you're just not trying" are messages the depressive person frequently hears. These messages only contribute to the negative self-talk, feelings of failure, and hopelessness the individual already feels. Research with dogs many years ago demonstrated that if an animal believes that it can't control its circumstances, it gives up and quits trying. Martin Seligman and Steve Maier (1967) labeled this behavior "learned helplessness" and hypothesized that the lack of control contributes to the symptoms in depressed individuals. One way this process may occur is that if the individual believes he/she should be able to control the symptoms of depression if they just tried harder, but no amount of effort reduced the depression, the individual would eventually give up. Therefore, blaming the individual with depression is only likely to cause the individual to quit trying. Finally, if I can help an individual with depression recognize the symptoms of depression as due to the physical illness of depression we can often begin improving the depressive symptoms. You may ask "How can that be? You just said that the person doesn't have control over depression and isn't to blame." Which is true. However, cognitive-behavioral therapy can assist with improving perceived control which leads to improved self-care behaviors. If the individual doesn't feel guilty and like a failure, they become more able to take steps that can help reduce the depressive symptoms. I explain to clients that the treatment of depressive illness is similar to treatment of chronic pain: if a person examines his or her symptoms without negative self-evaluation he or she may be able to take reasonable steps towards recovery. For example, we know that exercise reduces depressive symptoms (Leith, 1994). However, exercise is frequently difficult for individuals suffering depressive disorders. If the individual blames him or herself and thinks "If I wasn't so weak and lazy I could get over this depression" he or she is less likely to try exercise. However, if he or she thinks "I have a physical illness that makes it difficult for me to exercise, but if I recognize my limitations and start a little bit at a time I'll be able to do it" he or she is then more likely to try. Therefore, a necessary condition for reducing depressive symptoms is to recognize the depressive disorders as a medical condition and to refrain from self-recrimination. As with many other medical conditions, depression can be improved with lifestyle behavioral changes. However, the individual needs to believe in his or her ability to impact the symptoms. Leith, L.M. (1994). Foundations of Exercise and Mental Health. Morgantown, WV: Fitness Information Technology. Seligman, M.E.P. and Maier, S.F. (1967). Failure to escape traumatic shock. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 19. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Making Attributions for a Healthier Attitude by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet "Instead of attributing all problems to personal failure, think of the complexity of your behavior. Take responsibility for your behavior, but don't blame yourself." Simple Explanations for Others' Behavior. A natural human tendency is to simplify explanations, especially explanations regarding the behavior of other people. Even science teaches the importance of being parsimonious; in other words, don't use a complex explanation when a simple one will do. However, many times we over-simplify the cause of behavior, both as individuals and as a science. Fundamental Attribution Error. In social psychology, a concept known as "the fundamental attribution error" describes the tendency to view too much of someone else's behavior as related to internal factors. For instance, if a person is fired from a job, we may think, "That person is incompetent," even though we could as easily think, "That job was not right for that person." We tend to believe that the problems other people have are due to some internal fault or flaw and we tend to over-estimate the degree of the person's responsibility. Complex Explanations for Our Own Behavior. Interestingly, we tend to view our own behavior in a more complex manner: we attribute our own failures to external factors and our successes to internal factors. If we get fired from a job, we may think, "My boss had it in for me," whereas, if we get promoted, we may think, "I am intelligent and hard-working." This concept is even more complex, however, because individuals disposed to depression think in the opposite manner: they attribute their failures to internal flaws and their successes to luck. Therefore, in the same situation of being fired from a job, they may think, "I deserved it because I'm an incompetent idiot." How These Explanations Affect Us. So why is all this important? Because the way we make attributions about behavior affects relationships and self-esteem. If we over-simplify behavior, we may contribute to poor self-esteem, or ruin a relationship. Think about a recent argument you had, preferably one that focused on your behavior. Now think about how much of the argument was due to the other individual over-simplifying the reasons for your behavior followed by your attempts to justify the behavior. You may be surprised to see how many disagreements relate to this tendency to overlook the complexities of human behavior. For example, a woman tells her husband that he doesn't care about her because he forgot about her birthday. In this example she simply equates forgetting her birthday with not caring. However, from her husband's view, his forgetting may be much more complex. His family of origin may not have celebrated birthdays, and so, his concept of the importance of birthdays may be different than his wife's notion. Or, he may have been experiencing a number of stressful situations that required a great deal of energy. Or, the neurological make-up of his brain may not be conducive to remembering dates. These three possibilities cover the areas of learning history, current environmental stresses, and biological predispositions. None of them have anything to do with whether he cares about his wife or not. What makes human behavior even more interesting is that the three possibilities elaborated above may all be involved in a single behavior. Thus, the man above may have his background, stress, and genetics working against him in remembering birthdays. But his wife made the simple attribution that his behavior indicated he didn't care about her. I'll leave it to your imagination what may happen next in their interaction due to her not understanding the complexity of his behavior. Understanding the complexity of human behavior doesn't mean that we excuse people's behavior; it just means we allow for more complex explanations. Such a stance is particularly crucial in interactions with children as they are heavily influenced by adults' responses. For instance, if a father criticizes his son for not paying attention in school and attributes this problem to laziness, the boy may begin to think of himself as lazy. This occurs especially when the child has no alternative explanation. One possible explanation may be that the child has Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) which is a biological condition. However, until recently, the variability in the performance of children with ADD led many people to choose the simple explanation that the child wasn't trying. Often, we need to look beyond these simple explanations to see what the real problem may be. Quickly attributing a simple explanation can blind us to other possibilities. WHAT ARE THE CAUSES OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR? Environmental Factors. Appreciating the complexities of human behavior involves understanding that we are biological beings--that our basic make-up, such as intelligence or disposition, is part of our genetic coding. However, that genetic coding is influenced by our experiences, which includes both our learning history and our current stresses. For instance, an individual may be born with a predisposition to develop an above average intelligence. However, poor nutrition and lack of environmental stimulation may result in an intelligence level that falls short of the genetic coding. Biological Predisposition. In the area of mental and physical disorders, the "diathesis-stress" model for illness explains that a "diathesis", or predisposition, exists within a particular individual for a specific illness. Having a predisposition means that the individual has the tendency to develop the illness under certain conditions. However, this explanation also means that the individual will not develop the disorder or that the disorder may not be as severe under certain conditions. What I have noticed in my practice is that those clients who have the most severe anxiety or depression often grew up with parents with similar problems. Thus, they have both the genetic coding and the learning from their parents' modeling of irrational thinking and behavior. Personality Traits. We can think of many of our personality traits in a similar manner. If we take a child with a high activity level and put her in an environment where she must sit still and then criticize her when she doesn't, she may develop low self-esteem and begin to act in an oppositional and defiant manner. Whereas, a similar child whose energy is accepted and directed, may learn to focus his activity in a goal-directed way and feel good about himself. As you see, behavior is not as simple as "will-power" or the individual's fault. As a society, we need to begin to look at behavior in it's complexity instead of trying to place blame. This allows us to explore the behavior less judgmentally. Such a stance permits the individual to examine his or her behavior without being defensive. HOW CAN I USE THIS UNDERSTANDING TO BENEFIT MY LIFE? Identify the attribution. First, when you find yourself upset by certain behavior of others, ask yourself why you are upset. If you find yourself blaming the other person, such as "He's doing that on purpose," see if you can think of other possible causes of the behavior. For instance, you might consider when a child is screaming for your attention, "He's behaving this way because he learned this behavior gets him attention." By thinking of such possibilities, it gives you an opportunity to respond in a helpful manner. You might decide to reinforce appropriate behavior and ignore the screaming. Or in another scenario where someone is ignoring you, instead of taking it personally, you might think "Maybe she has an anxiety disorder that makes it difficult to talk with people." If you begin to think about other possibilities such as these, you may find it easier to cope with situations and know what to do. Recognize the complexity of behavior. Second, if you have a tendency toward depression, you need to give yourself a break. Instead of attributing all problems to personal failure, think of the complexity of your behavior. Take responsibility for your behavior, but don't blame yourself. What I mean by this is to accept the consequences resulting from your behavior, but don't degrade yourself for making mistakes. For instance, if you start an exercise program, and you don't exercise for a week, instead of berating yourself for failing, just start again. Tell your-self, "The most important thing is trying, not whether I succeed or not." Such an attitude actually allows you to accomplish more rather than spending energy to blame yourself. Recognize the biology of behavior. Third, recognize the importance of biology and accept your limitations and the limitations of others. Some people are not biologically inclined to be Olympic athletes; other people are not meant to be thin; and others are not inclined to be color coordinated. We have our differences, our talents, and our limitations. We can not be perfect in everything. Each of us needs to accept ourselves as we are. By truly accepting ourselves, we will also be able to accept other people. Such a recognition also allows you to accept mental illness as no different than physical illness. If you don't blame yourself or others for physical illness, then don't place blame for mental illness. As with any illness, it is our responsibility to do what is necessary to take care of ourselves. One way to do so is to learn the skills to manage our lives. The way we think and cope with stress affects not only our mental health, but also, our physical health. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Issues When Ending a Sports Career by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...it is critical to recognize that the athletes self-identity is typically inseparable from their role as an athlete...Whether the career ended as planned or suddenly, the athlete experiences a significant loss that can be as devastating as losing a loved one." Tweet Frequently, athletes are so caught up in the excitement of their career and on developing the necessary skills and techniques to succeed in their sports career that they dont anticipate what may occur when their sports career ends. Sports careers are different than many other careers because they frequently end at a much younger age than standard retirement age and often may end unexpectedly. The transition can be made somewhat easier the more the athlete recognizes the issues in ending the career and prepares for life after a sports career. First, it is critical to recognize that the athletes self-identity is typically inseparable from their role as an athlete. Often for many years the major focus in their life is on developing as an athlete and succeeding in their chosen sport. When the sports career ends, it leaves a major hole in the athletes life. Whether the career ended as planned or suddenly, the athlete experiences a significant loss that can be as devastating as losing a loved one. The end of the career doesnt mean just not engaging in the sport anymore. It also changes the athletes role: he or she is no longer an athlete. In addition, it affects others perception of the individual; he or she may no longer get the recognition for their accomplishment. Other changes may include changes in living situation, financial status, and leisure time. Even though change can be for the better, all change involves loss. And whether we want to recognize it or not, all human beings react to loss. For athletes who have suddenly ended their career due to something such as an injury, the loss can be even more profound. The Kubler-Ross model developed from observations with terminally ill patients has often been used to explain our reactions to different types of loss. The model identifies five stages of grief that individuals experience: denial, bargaining, anger, sadness, and acceptance. The initial stage of denial can be manifested in different ways for an athlete depending on the circumstances of the career ending. An athlete with a career-ending injury may deny the severity of the injury and insist that she will return to the sport. For athletes with planned endings, we sometimes see them returning to the sport after retirement. The stage of bargaining can be manifested by the athlete trying to negotiate ways to continue in the sports career. Or it could be an injured athlete trying to make a deal with God: If you cure me, I will devote my life to helping others. Anger sets in when the athlete realizes that the end of the career is a reality. Sometimes the anger is clearly directed against a target such as someone who caused the injury. Other times it can be more diffuse and be manifested as general irritability and a tendency to get in conflict with others. The anger stage breaks through the last vestiges of denial which causes the full impact of the loss to be felt. The grief process can occur over a few months or a person can become stuck in the grief for years and never resolve it. The final stage of acceptance occurs after the athlete has allowed him or herself to fully experience the emotions related to the loss. The termination of a sports career can be easier or harder depending upon the athletes preparation for termination and how it is handled by those around him or her. If the athlete has engaged in retirement planning which includes developing plans for another career, for future financial stability, and for handling other peoples reactions then the termination of a sports career can occur more smoothly. Although athletes may not want to deal with it, engaging in this process for the potential of something unexpected such as an injury can be very beneficial as well. The coach can make the termination process easier by addressing it as part of an athletes training; just as mental skills are becoming more accepted as important to an athletes success, planning and goal-setting for the future can also be seen as an integral part of the training. The more the coach makes this clear, the more the athlete will accept it. The coach can have experts on retirement planning talk to the athletes periodically to help with the process. After career termination the coach can be supportive to the athlete by helping him or her understand the grief process and that it is normal to experience it. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Happiness Audio Articles The following articles have audio versions: The following articles have audio versions: The Secret to Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Discusses the concept of happiness and the common obstacles to achieving happiness. Reviews the methods on how to reduce the obstacles to happiness. Sadness is a State of Happiness Explains how all emotions are important to overall contentment and satisfaction in life. Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions A description of 50 different suggestions that can help create opportunities for happiness. Happiness is an Attitude Discusses how thinking, not events, influence overall happiness. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive PeopleIntroduction by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D.Clinical Psychologist Read the following article to: Discover the purpose of passive-aggressive behavior and how to counter it. Learn how to identify the different types of passive-aggressive behavior to help determine the best method to use in response. Identify ways to manage your response so as to prevent the passive-aggressive person from achieving their goal. Also read: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Index of Passive-Aggressive Examples Next: Learn how to deal effectively with passive-aggressive people Estimated reading time: 1 minute, 30 seconds What is passive-aggressive behavior? Passive-aggressive (PA) behavior is an indirect method of expressing criticism or negative emotions such as anger, frustration, disappointment, disapproval. By using an indirect approach the PA person does not take responsibility for the comments or behavior and can easily shift blame. PA behavior often leaves the recipient experiencing frustration and self-doubt. Why are people with PA behavior so hard to deal with? Generally, difficult social conflicts frequently involve PA behavior. The reason PA behavior is often more distressing than even aggressive behavior is because you are not only hurt but it causes you to doubt yourself and your experience of reality. In contrast, when someone is aggressive towards you, their intention is clear and it is easier to make a decision such as I need to steer clear of this person or I need to report this behavior. PA behavior is not so clear. The purpose of PA behavior is for the aggressor to avoid responsibility for their actions while causing distress for someone else or obtaining something they want. PA behavior can easily be denied or blame shifted: I didn't mean it the way you took it. You're being too sensitive. You're just trying to get me in trouble. As a result, PA behavior cannot be addressed in the same way you might handle aggressive behavior. So, how can PA behavior be handled? All PA people have a goal. It can be to make themselves feel better or to undermine your efforts in some way or to get what they want. By being aware of the underlying purpose of the behavior you can respond in a way that prevents them from succeeding at their agenda. The less likely they are to achieve their goal, the more likely you will see a reduction in their behavior. Next: Learn how to use the rules and methods to deal with PA people Rule 1. Identify type of PA behavior - malicious or unintentional Rule 2. Recognize when you need to address your thinking or behavior Rule 3. Always remain calm. Rule 4. Withhold the PA person's reward Rule 5. Choose your goal Rule 6. Choose your words carefully Rule 7. Be assertive Method 1. Active listening technique Method 2. Laugh and agree technique Method 3. Questioning technique Method 4. The broken record technique Method 5. Direct confrontation Method 6. Consequences to behavior Method 7. Reward desired behavior Method 8. Be passive-aggressive Copyright 2015 (Revised 2022) by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles CES-Depression The following questionnaire is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. As with many research questionnaires, this questionnaire may not be normed for online participants. Please take this into account when you receive the results. This questionnaire measures clinical depression. However, it is primarily a screening instrument and the results should be discussed with your doctor or therapist. It was developed by the Center for Epidemiological Studies and has extensive research validation. Directions: Below is a list of some of the ways you may have felt or behaved. Please indicate how often you have felt this way during the past week: No login required to obtain results. Item 1: I was bothered by things that usually dont bother me. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 2: I did not feel like eating; my appetite was poor. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 3: I felt that I could not shake off the blues even with help from my family. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 4: I felt that I was just as good as other people. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 5: I had trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 6: I felt depressed. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 7: I felt that everything I did was an effort. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 8: I felt hopeful about the future. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 9: I thought my life had been a failure. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 10: I felt fearful. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 11: My sleep was restless. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 12: I was happy. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 13: I talked less than usual. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 14: I felt lonely. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 15: People were unfriendly. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 16: I enjoyed life. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 17: I had crying spells. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 18: I felt sad. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 19: I felt that people disliked me. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) Item 20: I could not get going. Rarely or None of the Time (Less than 1 day) Some or a Little of the Time (1-2 days) Occasionally or a Moderate Amount of the Time (3-4 days) All of the Time (5-7 days) No login required to obtain results. For authors and more information: Radloff LS, The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 1977, pp.385-401. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Danger: Negativity Ahead by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...'I wouldn't have it any other way.' In other words, why dwell on what you can't have? Focus on what you do have." Tweet Many times when I first meet clients some comment, I've tried that positive thinking and it doesn't work. What they don't expect is that I tell them I am fully in agreement with them that positive thinking doesn't work. However, negative thinking doesn't work either. We need to develop realistic, believable thinking. Positive thinking is believing Everything will be all right whereas realistic thinking is I might encounter some obstacles but I can figure it out. As you can see, realistic thinking is more believable than positive thinking and that is what makes it effective. However, all too often, people believe that their negative thinking is realistic. Therefore, they need to be able to evaluate it and determine how to look at the problem more realistically. The two main problematic areas of negative thinking are negative evaluation whether of yourself, others, or the situation and negative labeling of yourself or others. Let's examine each of these types of thinking. Negative Evaluation of Self 1) Expecting the Negative. When negative evaluation is directed at the self it tends to expect negative outcomes for your actions: No matter how hard I try, I'm not going to get that promotion rather than Hard work pays off but even if it doesn't I can have the personal satisfaction that I did a good job. 2) Seeing Only the Negative. In addition, negative evaluation is the tendency to see only the negative aspect of yourself when there might be something more positive, I tend to let people take advantage of me rather than I am a generous person although it is unfortunate that some people will take advantage of that. 3) Self-Fulfilling Prophecy. Notice that even though we are addressing the same issue, the realistic thinking allows the person too feel differently about themselves. In fact, one of the dangers of negativity thinking is the development of a self-fulfilling prophecy. A self-fulfilling prophecy is when we make a prediction about the future and then because we made the prediction we are likely to create the outcome. So, for example, if a person says I'm not going to get that promotion what is the most obvious thing he or she is likely to do? With such a belief, that person is less likely to try. As a result, when he or she doesn't get the promotion the comment is See, I wouldn't have gotten it anyway. 4) Judging the Self Harshly. Frequently I see people who would never dream of judging others as harshly as they judge themselves. I explain to them that this is a good clue that their thinking is irrational. If it's not something you expect of other people then it is not something reasonable to expect of yourself. Or if you wouldn't criticize someone else and call them names, don't do it to yourself. Now I'm certainly not saying that it's okay to treat yourself badly as long as you do the same to others. No, I'm saying this is just a helpful way to examine your thinking and determine if it may be unreasonable. Negative Evaluation of Others 1) Direct Evaluation. Negative evaluation can frequently be directed at others. The same types of comments we make about ourselves we can make about others. Unfortunately, sometimes these comments may be directed to others. An example that I've experienced is when a teacher told my teenage son If you don't take school seriously, you'll never achieve anything. Before I could respond (due to my shock) my son politely responded How do you know that? I knew at that moment that whatever path he chose in life, he would be successful because he wouldn't allow himself to be bullied by someone else's negative evaluation. 2) Subtle Evaluation. However, not all negative evaluation is so direct. Years ago, for instance, a researcher did a study to examine teachers' negative and positive expectations of students. However, this researcher told the teachers that testing had indicated that certain students would make considerable progress although in reality students were chosen randomly and not based on test scores. However, the students the researcher's identified as having potential did make considerable progress. The researcher attributed this to the teacher's positive expectations which led to certain behaviors towards the child such as helping him or her understand or giving more positive reinforcement. The implications is that a negative expectation could be as powerful, if not more so. In fact, this type of research wouldn't be conducted today as it could negatively influence the teacher's behavior with the other students who weren't identified as having potential for improvement. 3) Projection of Self Evaluation. Many times people who are self-critical will also tend to be critical of others. The negativity towards others is a reflection of their expectations for themselves. I had a client with road rage once who stated I drive courteously. They should do the same. Such an expectation led this person to chasing people down and berating them about inappropriate behavior. 4) Projection of Negative Traits. However, some people who are other-critical are not particularly self-critical. They tend to blame and to view others as wrong. In fact, they may engage in the same behavior for which they criticize others. One of the defense mechanisms described by Sigmund Freud is called projection which is the tendency to see certain flaws in others that we refuse to admit in ourselves. For instance, a dishonest person claiming that no one can be trusted anymore is projecting his or her own flaws onto others. Negative Evaluation of Situations 1) Choice to Be Negative. Frequently, people will evaluate a situation in an excessively negative manner. I hear people all the time complain about the weather. It's too hot. It's too cold. It's raining too much. If we have the capacity to complain about the weather, certainly it is in our capacity to find something to enjoy about it. Most situations aren't all bad or all good. In other words, we have a choice as to which perspective we want to take, or how we want to focus our attention. 2) Protecting the Self. Many times people say to me, "I imagine the worst because then I won't be blind-sided. I don't want to be disappointed." This attitude doesn't make sense unless there's actually something that can be done to prevent the outcome. Otherwise, the way I see it is that if you have some event that is going to occur in a month and you imagine the worst-case outcome, you will spend the month being miserable. Then, if the outcome is bad, you still feel disappointed in spite of having felt bad for the month. If the outcome is good, you just wasted a month feeling bad. However, if you imagine the best-case scenario, you'll spend that month feeling good. If the outcome turns out to be bad, you'll be disappointed but not any more so than if you had imagined the worst-case scenario. 3) Making the Choice. Therefore, we can make a choice what perspective to take. The nice thing about taking a positive perspective is that we may create a positive self-fulfilling prophecy. At least we can create a positive prophecy of coping. My husband suffers with chronic pain and I see him make a choice every day to focus on the positive things in his life. In fact, a statement he frequently makes is "I wouldn't have it any other way." In other words, why dwell on what you can't have? Focus on what you do have. Negative Labeling, Self-Directed Sometimes during my first session with a client, I will count how many times the person makes disparaging self-statements: "I'm so lazy" or "This is stupid" or "You're going to think I'm crazy." At some point I will remark "Do you realize how many times you've criticized yourself in the last 15 minutes? If you can criticize yourself that many times to me, I can't even imagine how much you must be doing it internally." The point of this statement is to draw their attention to the negative labeling. Sometimes, just by being aware of it a person can be able to reduce it. Now, you might say "But the person might still have a negative self-image even if he stops the labeling." And certainly, that is true. However, you can't change the self-image until you stop the labeling. So, being aware of the negative labeling and trying to stop it is the first step towards changing the self-image. Negative Labeling, Other-Directed Negative labeling can also be directed at others: "What an idiot!" However, we need to keep in mind that often we are observing only a small portion of a person's behavior so how can we judge the person in totality. We all make mistakes and do stupid things at times. But that doesn't make us an idiot. Just as you would appreciate the benefit of the doubt when you're in error, realize that other people need the same. The nice outcome for you, however, is that it reduces anger and rage which has positive health benefits. Challenging Negative Thinking Is it the most probable outcome? Is the label accurate in all situations? Are there other possible ways to view a situation? Can you re-word a negative label to make it more neutral? Or even more positive such as people do when writing a job resume? However, if it comes down to a choice between a negative explanation or expectation and a positive one because you can't determine which one is likely to be accurate, then why not choose the positive thinking? At least we know the positive thinking feels good while you're engaging in it, so why feel bad unnecessarily? Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "Many people, even medical professionals, believe that cognitive therapy is about telling someone to think accurately. If that were the case, then we should all be thinking rationally because people are always telling one another how they should think." Tweet For help in learning to use a cognitive diary, see Cognitive Diary Training Examples Often, when I suggest to my clients to use the Cognitive Diary to help change irrational thinking styles, they protest "But I know my thinking is wrong and how I should think. That doesn't make a difference. How will writing it down help?" Many people, even medical professionals, believe that cognitive therapy is about telling someone to think accurately. If that were the case, then we should all be thinking rationally because people are always telling one another how they should think. However, several aspects of using the Cognitive Diary help people to actually learn how to change their thinking. The first is developing a rationale that you can believe more than the irrational thinking. The second is repeatedly using this rationale until it becomes automatic thinking. And the third is using different sensory modalities to help reinforce the thinking. Developing a Believable Rationale As I indicated most people who come into therapy know when their thinking is irrational but they say, "But that's what I feel!" This statement implies they don't believe they have control over their thinking even when they believe it is inaccurate. They are using feelings to validate the irrational beliefs. Cognitive Diary CBT Self-Help The Cognitive Diary CBT Self-Help app helps you to determine some ways to challenge the irrational thinking. Once you have done that, it is important to read the rational challenges frequently until they automatically come to mind rather than the irrational thinking. Another subset of people may not understand that they are engaging in irrational thinking. These individuals will typically be a problem for others may not believe that they have a problem. A good example of this is someone who tends to blame others instead of taking responsibility for themselves: "If you would have told me I needed gas, I wouldn't have run out." One of the ways that they may arrive at therapy is if a spouse or boss tells them, "You need to make some changes." So for these individual, they need to learn why their thinking is irrational before they can take the further steps of changing it. Once a person identifies an irrational thought, they need to develop a rational challenge to the thought. This rational challenge needs to be believable to the individual. For example, I frequently work with people who were abused as children and as a result have low self-esteem. They might believe "I am worthless." If I challenge this thought with "You are a good and valuable person" they are unlikely to accept this statement. By itself it is not believable. However, if I back the statement up with evidence such as "You do valuable volunteer work that helps people" or "You make sure you are available for your children and you protect them" they are much more likely to accept this. Then they may be able to develop a believable rationale such as "I am a worthwhile person because the evidence shows that I care deeply for others and treat them with respect." The Cognitive Diary aids a person in this process by having them write about a specific event and fleshing out the different thoughts they have related to the event. The next step is to determine if any of this thinking is irrational. The interactive Cognitive Diary not only gives you additional reading about the different styles, it will also provide specific questions to help you determine how the thinking may be irrational. Your final step is to write a sentence or two that helps you refute the original irrational thinking. Repetition of Believable Rationale However, just developing a believable rationale is not enough to change irrational thinking and feelings based upon this thinking. The most important part of cognitive therapy is frequent use of the rational challenges that a person develops. Without a repetition, cognitive therapy is likely to be ineffective. I once gave a talk to medical professionals and one psychiatrist stated "I've tried this cognitive therapy and it doesn't work." The first think I asked this doctor was "How often did the person challenge the thinking?" and was told that those instructions weren't given. Yet, repetition of the rational challenges is the most important component to changing thinking! Frequently, we may "know" something at an intellectual level, but that doesn't mean it is an automatic process. For that to occur we need frequent practice. Just because I might intellectually understand the geometry of a pool table and how one ball angles off of another, it doesn't mean I can automatically shoot pool well without having had any practice. For some reason, when it comes to thinking people think they should just automatically change the thinking because they understand how it is inaccurate and that if it is not automatic, then it is not changeable. So it is important to think of the repetition as practice and that our thinking needs practice in order to change just as we need practice to learn any new skill. The reason for this is that when we are learning new skills we create new pathways in the brain. In other words, as we practice or experience something our neurons (brain cells) create pathways connecting to other brain cells. The theory is that certain pathways in the brain become automatic as it connects with more and more neurons. So, if someone is learning to play golf, the more they practice the more this process occurs and they develop "muscle memory" for how to swing the club. This muscle memory becomes an automatic process so that they don't have to think about every movement like they did when they first started to learn. Just as our brain develops automatic pathways for skills, it also develops these pathways for thinking. Unfortunately, some of these automatic pathways are the irrational ones that we don't want any more. We can't get rid of an automatic pathway that is already developed but the new automatic pathway can be reinforced enough so that it becomes stronger than the old one. And we do this through the repetition. For example, with our golf example above, let's say that the golfer originally learned to swing the club wrong and someone tells him a better way. At first, he may have to think a lot about his golf swing as he's playing so that he uses the new swing rather than the old one. However, with enough practice the new swing becomes more automatic and the preferred swing. However, the old swing is still in memory with an automatic pathway of its own so that if the golfer is under stress (an important tournament) he might be more likely to lapse into the old swing. When this happens with thinking, it may be necessary to use the Cognitive Diary again for awhile to reinforce the new rational automatic pathway. Therefore, once a person uses the Cognitive Diary and has developed a believable rationale to challenge the irrational thinking, they need to keep a copy of that rationale handy and use it frequently. In addition, the Cognitive Diary needs to be used repeatedly with different events to help develop a variety of rationales for the common problems in thinking that the individual experiences. Different Modalities for Reinforcement Another important aspect of the Cognitive Diary is that writing, in a sense, gets us outside of our heads. Seeing something on paper (or the computer screen) allows us to gain a different perspective. In fact, frequently I'll have clients comment when they are explaining their self-talk to me "When I say it out loud, it doesn't make sense." So, when we use a different sensory modality such as writing or talking or reading we may be able to perceive our thinking in a different way and be able to challenge it more effectively. Sometimes I have clients tell me "I can tell someone else this but I don't think that way myself." For those individuals I might tell them to talk to themselves in front of a mirror because then they are also using the visual modality as if they are talking to someone else. In addition to using different modalities to reinforce thinking, knowing that you are planning to record something on the Cognitive Diary forces you to be more aware of your thinking in general. Therefore, even for events that you don't write down, you are more likely to think them through and develop a believable rationale. This process helps to encourage the repetition discussed above. Completing the Cognitive Diary 1) Plan to use the Cognitive Diary daily. The more you use the diary the more quickly your thinking will change and the more you will reinforce the new automatic pathway. You don't need to write only about major events. In fact, writing about insignificant events will provide you with substantial practice to help change your thinking for the major events that occur less frequently. For example, an insignificant event can be "That grocery store clerk looked at me funny. She must think I'm ugly." 2) Follow the directions on the diary to help you think through the process of developing your believable rationale. If you have trouble with developing the rationale, either read more about the styles of irrational thinking and how to challenge them or ask people you know for input. In addition, if you have a therapist, you can print a copy of the diary and take into your session to obtain feedback. 3) The Cognitive Diary is printer-friendly so that you can print it out and keep a copy for future reference. Please be sure to either print or copy your final result to your computer as your responses are not saved on this site and you can't access them later (although I do hope to develop a feature that will allow you to log-in and be able to retrieve previous diaries you completed). I encourage my clients to keep a folder of all their diaries so that they can review them which aids with the repetition part of the process. In addition, you can develop a list of the rational challenges that you develop and read frequently to help develop the automatic pathway. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training: Challenging Perfectionistic Demands by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "A person with perfectionistic demands hates failure of any type. They will often avoid challenges that they determine as too difficult rather than take the chance of failing." Tweet The following article is part of a series of articles that focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review One concept that I will revisit frequently in these articles is the importance of our cognitions, or thought process, to performance. The thought process can make or break an athlete no matter how capable he or she is physically. This article will focus on the perfectionistic thinking style and how it affects performance. Our culture tends to cultivate perfectionistic thinking. This, in itself, isnt necessarily a bad thing. It depends on the specific nature of the self-talk. Researchers make a distinction between a perfectionistic demand and a perfectionistic desire. The difference between these two concepts is not in the behavior but in the thinking; in particular, the thinking regarding negative outcomes. For instance, two individuals could have high expectations of success and attempt to achieve a task as perfectly as possible. However, the individual with the perfectionistic demand would feel like a failure. He or she would mentally berate himself and feel incompetent and worthless. Whereas, the individual with the perfectionistic desire would assess the situation differently: I tried my best and can feel good about my performance. I will learn from this experience and improve in the future. A person with perfectionistic demands hates failure of any type. They will often avoid challenge that they determine as too difficult rather than take the chance of failing. When my son competed in chess tournaments, he preferred to draw an expert or master level chess player as an opponent even though he was likely to lose to them. When I asked him why, he said he could learn more losing to them than winning against someone at his own level. I not only learned how smart my teenage son was but I realized this was a very important life strategy. Seek out people who are better than you and learn from them. Dont dread a better opponent. See it as an opportunity to learn and improve. In the martial arts Ive often heard of people who remain at the brown belt level rather than be promoted to black belt because then they can win at tournaments. These people are losing the big picture. They are making winning more important than learning. Therefore, they will never be true champions. Much of our perfectionistic behavior comes from concern about what others might think of us. A maxim from the Tao te Ching states If you care what people think, you will be their prisoner. In other words, you allow others to direct your choices, your behavior, your life instead of living according to your own values and desires. As a result you are trapped in a life that is not your own. To take control of our own lives we must take risks which means that we will make mistakes and experience failure along with our successes. However, those failures are frequently more valuable than the successes because we are taught not to fear failure. One of the times from which I learned the most in kata competition was when I completely forgot my kata. I learned that the world didnt end and that people didnt treat me any different than previously. Ultimately, that failure contributed to my success in future competition because I learn to think differently about competition which decreased my nervousness and improved my performance. Instead of catastrophizing about the possibility of making mistakes and what people might think, I was able to focus on enjoying my performance. So how do you change perfectionistic demands to perfectionistic desires? The first step is awareness. You have to recognize destructive self-talk before you can change it. For some people, this step may be easy and they could count off a list without hesitation of negative perfectionistic statements that they use during practice or performance. However, others may not have any awareness of their self-statements. If this is the case, you may try deliberately focusing during practice on what you are saying internally to yourself. If you still have difficulty, ask a partner to observe your nonverbals such as facial expressions or intonations of disgust. When they see anything that may indicate an internal self-statement, they should stop you and ask what you are thinking. Once you have determined your self-statements, write them down so you can examine them. As yourself the following questions: Is this a negative statement? How does it make me feel? Do I feel worse using this statement or better? Does it encourage me to keep trying or do I want to give up? Does it cause a heightened negative intensity such as nervousness or anger? Or does it cause increased positive intensity such as excitement or eager anticipation? Does this self-statement benefit or harm me? Do I want to keep using this self-statement? If you determine that the self-statement is not beneficial and you dont want to keep using it, then you need to develop an alternative self-statement to replace it. For example, instead of saying Why cant I get this? Im so stupid, you can say As long as I keep trying, Ill keep improving. Or instead of saying What will people think if I make a mistake? you can say I am doing this for me and every mistake that I correct will help me perform better. Ask others for ideas regarding self-talk that they have found helpful. Once you have created a list of self-statements, you then need to work at replacing the old negative thinking. The key to changing thinking is repetition. The more you tell yourself something, the more it will begin to become automatic. You can do this by reviewing your list frequently throughout the day. You can choose a single statement to use while practicing. You can even tape your statements and listen to them while you are doing something else such as cooking. The overall goal is to increase the beneficial self-talk which reduces the effectiveness of the harmful self-talk. The end result should be a corresponding increase in performance. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Your Happiness Assessment The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. Your Happiness Assessment assesses fourteen different factors (see below) that influence happiness. By evaluating yourself, you can determine what areas can help you create the conditions for greater happiness in your life. Take test No login required to obtain results This site does not save results. You will have the option to email your results or you may save a copy to your device. If you have an Android device, you may download the Know Yourself Personality Tests app to take the test and your results will be saved in the app. The following factors are discussed in your results: Optimism is the tendency to believe in positive outcomes. Illness Susceptibility refers to your likelihood of engaging in behaviors critical to physical and mental health. Locus of Control is the degree that you believe in either effort or luck as the key to success. Compassion is feeling concern for other people when they experience misfortune. Trusting of Others is the belief in others\' good intentions. Affiliation is the desire to be around others and to enjoy social events. Pleasantness is the tendency to be easy-going, agreeable, and respectful of others. Emotional Stability is the tendency to not be swayed by emotions and for emotions to be manageable and controlled. Conscientiousness is the tendency to be meticulous and careful when completing tasks. Assertiveness is the ability to actively problem-solve and to handle situations directly, calmly, and with confidence. Self-Confidence is having trust or faith in yourself and your abilities. Gratefulness is the tendency to appreciate and to be thankful for your life circumstances. Approval-Seeking is the tendency to need others\' approval and to conform to expectations. Playfulness is focusing on the exciting aspects of life and encouraging others to laugh and have fun. This test was developed from the International Personality Item Pool which is a collaborative effort by personality researchers to develop advanced measures of individual differences. The results descriptions were written by a clinical psychologist. Related reading: The Secret to Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions Happiness is an Attitude Happy Friends Can Improve Your Health Can a Gratitude List Make a Difference in Your Life? Managing Adversity Improves the Outcome of Happiness Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Why You Don't Need to Be Happy Buying Happiness: It Can Be Done! Not Happy? Just Wait... Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong The Danger of Seeking Happiness: How to Protect Your Children The Pursuit of Happiness or the Pursuit of Money? Can't Force Happiness on Someone Money May Not Buy Happiness, But How You Spend Money May Help Want to Live a Long and Happy Life? Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! Intelligence, Health and Happiness Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You More questionnaires: Self-Efficacy List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R., & Gough, H. C. (2006). The International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84-96. International Personality Item Pool: A Scientific Collaboratory for the Development of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences (http://ipip.ori.org/). Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles How to Interfere with Therapy When Your Loved One Has Anxiety or Depression by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "By keeping (these) issues in mind and perhaps obtaining your own therapy, if necessary, you will be better able to assist your loved one in treatment and less likely to interfere." Tweet Most of the time parents and spouses of individuals with depressive or anxiety disorders truly want to assist in the treatment. However, sometimes their efforts may interfere due to lack of understanding or due to fears and their own internal pressure to make the situation better. So often family members may have their own irrational thinking that might influence the person with the disorder. Therefore, if you have a loved one with anxiety or depression, you may need to examine your behavior to prevent interference with their improvement. The following is a list of ways that family members interfere with treatment and some ways to change these behaviors. 1) Be Critical of Progress in Treatment. Family members may be critical of progress in treatment for various reasons including fear of the person not improving, inability to handle change, or a general tendency to be negative, critical, blaming. Somentimes criticism can even be disguised as "kindness" or "loving concern." For instance, "I'm just saying this because I'm concerned about you, but you don't seem to be making enough progress." I once had a mother who brought her adult son to me who had severe depression and stated to me "I would be happy if only he didn't spend all day in bed." Once he had achieved that she came back to me saying "I would be happy if he just could help around the house." Again, once he was able to do that she made another request "I would be happy if he just..." After four or five of these "disguised demands" I began to realize how he must feel. No matter what he accomplished, she never praised or focused on the accomplishment but on what he needed to do next. And she was never happy! He became discouraged and started sinking back into the depression. Frequently, family members are so fearful of what will happen if progress is not made that they focus too intently upon evaluating any sign of lack of progress in therapy. Even though evaluating therapy progress is important, it's difficult to do so from the outside. Often, prior to behavior changes, cognitive and emotional changes must occur. Those may not be evident to outside observers. 2) Consider Only Recent Progress. Therapy does not proceed in a straight line. It is often erratic. There will be hills and valleys in treatment. Often, the person feels worse before they feel better because they may be dealing with difficult emotional issues or having to face fears. Assessing progress based on their most recent behavior may discount the long-term changes. In the example above, the mother didn't keep in mind how far her son had come. Instead of focusing on the fact that he had been so severe at one time that he couldn't get out of bed, she focused only on what he had done recently. The individual with the disorder needs to feel pleased about the progress they are making, but if the focus is only on the recent progress or lack of progress they are likely to feel discouraged. 3) Be Intrusive. Such as making decisions for the patient or warning them about dangers if they make the wrong decisions or checking up on them all the time as if they are incapable of making adequate decisions. Many times the person with depression or anxiety already feels inadequate or a failure. If they also get this message from you, albeit indirectly, they feel justified in this irrational self-assessment. You may need to give them space to make decisions and to make mistakes so that they can learn to trust their own judgment and ability to deal with the world. 4) Punish Them for Disrespect or Disobedience. Whenever they express themselves, their anger, their disagreement, punish them. Even though it may be very subtle punishment such as a disapproving look, it still is effective in stifling attempts to try. When they first start dealing with their emotions they may not be very good at expressing themselves or handling anger so they need encouragement not punishment. Early in my career working with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, a wife brought her husband to me because he was so engaged in obsessions and compulsive rituals that he lost his job and couldn't function in the simplest of ways. She wanted me to "fix" him. However, as I worked with him I began to realize that many of his rituals were related to attempts to avoid emotion. For instance, if he was angry about something, he would instead focus on his fear of germs and excessive hand-washing. So, I felt he needed to express his anger to his wife. This angered his wife because she wanted him to get rid of the obsessions and compulsions but she wanted him to remain the passive, non-confrontational husband he had always been and refused to see how the two were intertwined. 5) Let Them Control You and Your Lifestyle. This includes living your life based on their needs and wants, not taking care of yourself or getting involved in your own activities, and being available for them whenever they might need you. Allowing their illness to control your life is not healthy for them or for you. It teaches them that it is okay to make the depression or anxiety the focus of their lives. To truly become more in control of the disorder it needs to have a realistic priority and not be the center of attention. For instance, a diabetic needs to watch their diet, take their medicine, manage stress, and exercise; however, they don't identify themselves by the diabetes but recognize the importance of other aspects of their lives. As a result, the illness does not take precedence over living their lives. 6) Refuse to Recognize the Chronicity of the Disorder. Believe that someday they will be "perfect" and no longer have an anxiety or depressive disorder. Although they may reach a point that the illness is not the controlling center of their lives, the belief that they have to be "cured" and prevents full participation in treatment. Therapy is based on accepting the illness and learning ways to cope with it and making those methods part of their lifestyle. Too often, people who believe that they are "cured" when they start feeling better stop using their coping skills and will relapse as a result. 7) Take Them From One Expert to Another. Certainly, a good therapist/client match is important for a good working relationship. But if you've been to several therapists with good reputations, the problem may have more to do with avoidance of treatment than with the therapists. Therefore, this may be a situation in which you need to set limits regarding working with the therapist even though it may be difficult. Often, the more unpleasant the therapy is the more effective it may be because the person is addressing the problem directly. 8) Try Every Medication Looking for the "Miracle" Cure. Only with mild and sometimes moderate illnesses do people with depressive or anxiety disorders experience complete relief from the symptoms due to medication. After trying a few medications, it may be best to get stabilized on a medication regimen and then concentrate on cognitive-behavioral therapy. The odds of a medication helping significantly decreases each time a new medication is tried because the medications are not that much different. However, if a medication is helpful but a side effect is interfering with the effectiveness, then perhaps a different formulation may be more effective. 9) Refuse to Attend or Cooperate with Treatment Because You're "Not the One With the Problem." Many people are intimidated by psychotherapists because they are fearful of examining themselves. "He doth protest too much" is certainly applicable in this situation. Individuals who are psychologically healthy are willing to look at themselves and their behavior non-defensively, and to make changes. The therapist is not trying to blame you or criticize you, he/she is trying to develop a solution to the problem. Sometimes that solution may involve you. Realize that you are asking a lot for your loved one to make changes and be willing to make changes yourself. 10) Don't Set Limits and Stick by Them. Just because someone has a disorder, doesn't mean they have permission to be irresponsible or to control someone else's life. In order for a situation to be bearable, you need to set limits. For instance, "If you are late, then we will leave without you." As we discussed above, you can't stop living your life. But sometimes that means setting some firm limits even though the person may be tearful or frightened or angry. And once you set limits, you need to implement them. "I understand you are afraid of having a panic attack if I leave the house, but you have learned skills from your therapist and you need to use them because I do need to leave the house. 11) Be Controlled by Their Anger. Individuals with anxiety or depression may become angry when they have to face difficult situations. If their anger controls you and makes you back down, then they are able to avoid the situation. Also, the anger becomes reinforced as a method of getting their way. For instance, a child with a school phobia may throw a temper tantrum to avoid school; if this works, they are likely to do the same again and may also generalize to other situations. 12) Make Things Too Comfortable. Make sure they have everything they desire so they have no incentive to make changes. Cook, clean, give them money, make life easy. One of the saddest situations I've dealt with as a therapist was a client who had Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. This brilliant, engaging woman was so fearful of making mistakes that she engaged in checking behaviors almost all day. She lived with her mother who supported her financially and emotionally. The mother even engaged in some of the checking rituals for her such as checking to make sure the doors were locked and the stove turned off. Through therapy, this woman was making progress but the process was painful as she had to confront her fears. One day she told me she wanted to quit therapy and said,"I really have it easy. I don't have to work or do anything around the house. I really don't have to face these fears because my mother will take care of me. Therapy is too hard." 13) Live in Fear that They Will Commit Suicide. Some parents and spouses don't set limits or make things comfortable or avoid anger because they are fearful that their loved one will commit suicide and they will feel to blame. However, by avoiding these things due to fear they are enabling other self-destructive behavior such as not trying to deal with the problems. Also, in reality they don't have control over suicidal behavior. Suicide in unpredictable, and therefore, uncontrollable. Even though suicide is higher among people with depressive and anxiety disorders than it is among the general population, it is still a very tiny percentage of people which makes it unpredictable. If this is a genuine concern, it's important for a mental health professional to be involved to assess routinely and to guide you. 14) Refuse To Accept Your Own Problems. Anxiety and depressive disorders have a genetic connection; they tend to co-occur in families. Sometimes a parent may have an anxiety or depressive disorder they are refusing to recognize which tends to transfer the burden on the child. Also, spouses may have problems that may interact with the anxiety or depression. Therefore, it is important to understand when your problem might interfere and or interact and to confront your problem. You are expecting your loved to do somehthing difficult and to address their problem. You should not expect any less of yourself. 15) Believe They Can Just Stop. Many people don't understand depressive or anxiety disorders. They believe that the individual is just not capable of handling everyday problems. Or they may even believe that the behavior is deliberate in order to avoid responsibility or to irritate. This type of belief tends to cause criticism and blame which only serves to make the person feel worse and helpless because they can't just stop or change. Therefore, it is critical to truly understand the nature of these disorders, to recognize them as medical conditions such as diabetes or heart disease which may need lifestyle changes in order to address, but are nevertheless physical conditions. 16) Don't Be Supportive. Along with not understanding the illness may be the tendency to not recognize how difficult it can be when the individual is in therapy and trying to address the problems. Your loved one needs you help him or her recognize the accomplishments and to appreciate the effort. When you give them compliments or encouragement they are likely to continue even when therapy may become difficult and they want to quit. Support is not enabling. Support aids them in confronting the issue, not with avoiding the issue as enabling does. 17) Believe the Disorder is Their Fault. This is the tendency to assign blame, to believe that they just don't have enough willpower or that the disorder is a punishment from God. Such a focus leads to self-defeating beliefs in which the individual tends to criticize themselves and feel worse which does not create positive change. The idea of the lack of willpower or lack of motivation needs to be viewed differently. For instance, maybe the individual lacks the necessary skills and they need to be taught. Or maybe the anxiety is too high and they need the assistance of medication and/or a supportive person to help them face fears. But most of the time, unless there is reinforcement to remaining ill such as the earlier example, people do not cause the disorder or refuse to address the problems, but they might not always know what to do. 18) Want Them to Get Better, But Don't Want Them to Change. When people address the depression and anxiety, it typically means addressing a lot of related issues. The person can't just deal with the depression or anxiety, because they also need to deal with triggering factors. Sometimes those triggering factors can mean changes that are going to affect other family members such as the example above about the man needing to express his anger. Or maybe the person needs to focus more time and attention on taking care of him or herself such as doing stress management or yoga classes and this takes time away from the family. Be prepared that changes may affect you in negative ways too but are necessary. 19) View the Disorder as a Sign of Your Failure. Just as the individual with anxiety and depression is not at fault for the problem, you need to recognize that you are not at fault. Unless you have been physically or emotionally abusive, you did not cause the problems. Although some of your behaviors may affect the individual or interact with the problems, these behaviors did not cause the depression and anxiety. If your feelings of failure are strong, you may need to learn how to challenge these beliefs because such feelings may contribute to your loved one feeling guilty in turn. By keeping the above issues in mind and perhaps obtaining your own therapy, if necessary, you will be better able to assist your loved one in treatment and less likely to interfere. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Listen Free to Energizing Audios Wake Up Mindfulness Energizing the Body and Mind Mindful Breathing Stretching Wake Up Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Energizing the Body and Mind If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mindful Breathing If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Stretching If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Wake Up Mindfulness This audio is an eight minute mindfulness method to help you wake up from sleep with a focus on feeling energy. Mindfulness is a state of mind in which you focus completely on your most immediate experience. In this exercise, the focus is on bringing energy into your body with each mindful breath and focusing in a positive way on your day. When doing any mindful exercise, it is important to very gently bring your focus back to your experience if distracting thoughts occur. Do not try to get rid of the thoughts because that interferes with mindfulness. Instead, just gently refocus back to the exercise. Listen Energizing the Body and Mind This ten minute audio focuses on increasing the feeling of energy and strength in the body. This audio has several purposes. It can assist people who tend to have problems with fatigue or low energy. Also, it can aid with a more positive focus regarding the body. This can be an excellent audio for athletes who need to pump up their energy. It can help them focus on feeling the physical strength of their body and prepare them for their sport. Listen Mindful Breathing This audio is a quick three minute stress management technique that coaches you through mindful breathing. Mindfulness is a state of mind in which you focus completely on your most immediate experience. In this exercise, the focus is on the full experience of your breathing. When doing any mindful exercise, it is important to very gently bring your focus back to your experience if distracting thoughts occur. Do not try to get rid of the thoughts because that interferes with mindfulness. Instead, just gently refocus back to the exercise. Once you have learned this technique, you can use it to help with sleep when you are having trouble quieting your mind. Focus on the mindful breathing. Whenever any thoughts occur, gently bring your focus back to your breath. You may have to do this a number of times before your mind quiets. Once you are fully focused on your each breath, you are more likely to drift naturally off to sleep. Listen Stretching This audio is a quick two minute stretching exercise to increase blood flow throughout your body. As the blood flow increases you will experience tension release in the muscles and overall body relaxation. You can use this exercise throughout your day to increase your relaxation and reduce the effects of stress on your body. Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Cognitive Diary Training Examples For help in learning to use a cognitive diary, read article Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary Related PsychNotes: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Cognitive Diary Training Example 1: Boyfriend Forgot Birthday Cognitive Diary Training Example 2: Doctor is Frustrated with Me Cognitive Diary Training Example 3: Saying "No" to My Daughter Cognitive Diary Training Example 4: Husband Says "I Don't Care" Cognitive Diary Training Example 5: Wife Won't Leave Me Alone When I'm Upset Cognitive Diary Training Example 6: Husband Wants Me to Go to Work Event Cognitive Diary Training Example 7: Son Doesn't Do What I Ask Cognitive Diary Training Example 8: Best Friend Dating My Ex Cognitive Diary Training Example 9: Passed Over for Promotion Cognitive Diary Training Example 10: Being Assertive with Boss Cognitive Diary Training Example 11: Disrespectful Attitude from Adult Child Cognitive Diary Training Example 12: Too Depressed to Call Cognitive Diary Training Example 13: Jealous of Wife Talking to Another Man Cognitive Diary CBT Self-Help The Cognitive Diary CBT Self-Help app helps you to determine some ways to challenge the irrational thinking. Once you have done that, it is important to read the rational challenges frequently until they automatically come to mind rather than the irrational thinking. Cognitive Diary Training Example 14: Fear of Panic in Meeting Cognitive Diary Training Example 15: "Snippy" Email from Friend Cognitive Diary Training Example 16: Fear of Having a Panic Attack While Flying Cognitive Diary Training Example 17: Catastrophizing About Medical Tests Cognitive Diary Training Example 18: What if My Co-workers Find Out I Have an Anxiety Disorder? Cognitive Diary Training Example 19: For OCD: What if I Forget to Lock My Doors? Cognitive Diary Training Example 20: Responsible for Others' Feelings Cognitive Diary Training Example 21: Just Trying to be Helpful Cognitive Diary Training Example 22: Sister Marrying the Wrong Man Cognitive Diary Training Example 23: Hopelessness Due to Depression Cognitive Diary Training Example 24: Happiness Dependent Upon Wife Cognitive Diary Training Example 25: Co-worker Doesn't Like Me Cognitive Diary Training Example 26: Fiance Spends Valentine's Day with Son Cognitive Diary Training Example 27: Toxic Family and Holiday Visits Cognitive Diary Training Example 28: Husband's Unreasonable Expectations of ADD Wife Cognitive Diary Training Example 29: Back-stabbing Doctor Colleague Cognitive Diary Training Example 30: Husband Gives the Silent Treatment Cognitive Diary Training Example 31: Saying "I'm Fine" When I'm Not Cognitive Diary Training Example 32: Insomnia: Worrying About Not Sleeping Cognitive Diary Training Example 33: I Can't STAND It! Cognitive Diary Training Example 34: Eating When Feeling Lonely Cognitive Diary Training Example 35: Making Assumptions about Another's Intentions Cognitive Diary Training Example 36: Worried that Someone Dislikes Her Cognitive Diary Training Example 37: "My co-workers should respect me!" Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) When You have Negative Thoughts about Your Thoughts Don't Assume You Know What Others Are Thinking and Feeling Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? Blaming as a Way of Feeling in Control How Does Cognitive Therapy Help Depression? Why You Need to Write to Challenge Thinking Be Sure to Sleep After Exposure Treatment Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem This Is Your Brain on Change Treatment Resistant Depression isn't Resistant to Cognitive Therapy Did You Know Psychotherapy Has Stronger Scientific Evidence Than Many Common Medical Procedures? Binge Eating: CBT vs. Medication Why CBT Instead of Medication? Problem with Depression and CBT: It Can Be OverWhelming How Effective is CBT for Children With Anxiety Disorders? Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! CBT Reduces Anxiety During Breast Cancer Treatment CBT vs. Medication for Depression Effectiveness of Online Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Free Relaxation Audio Downloads Meadow Relaxation Mountain Cabin Relaxation Sunrise On the Beach Mindfulness Tropical Garden Mindfulness Riding a Horse Across the Plains Relaxation Magical Forest For Children The Great Desert Mindfulness Cityscape Mindfulness Day On the Farm Mindfulness Rainbow Relaxation Hot Springs Relaxation Starry Night Relaxation Additional reading: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Meadow Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Meadow Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mountain Cabin Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mountain Cabin Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Sunrise On the Beach Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Sunrise On the Beach Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Tropical Garden Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Tropical Garden Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Riding a Horse Across the Plains Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Riding a Horse Across the Plains Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magical Forest For Children If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magical Forest For Children If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download The Great Desert Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download The Great Desert Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Cityscape Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Cityscape Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Day On the Farm Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Day On the Farm Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Hot Springs Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Starry Night Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Meadow Relaxation Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes taking a walk through a meadow on a summer day and sitting next to a bubbling brook. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Mountain Cabin Relaxation Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes taking a walk through the snow at night and sitting in a mountain cabin in front of a fire. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Sunrise On the Beach Mindfulness Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes floating relaxing on a beach at night and experiencing the sunrise. Mindfulness relaxation focuses on fully experiencing the different sensations of the imagined scene. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Tropical Garden Mindfulness This audio creates the image of a beautiful tropical garden on a hot day. Although it can be used just for relaxation (for those who like warmth), it can also aid in learning to create mindfulness when the body may not be completely comfortable--in this instance, feeling the heat but focusing on the full experience of the garden. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Riding a Horse Across the Plains Relaxation This audio uses the guided imagery of riding a horse across the plains to induce relaxation. You experience the cool morning as you start your ride. You watch the antelope cavorting across the prairie and view the tumbleweeds blowing through a dry riverbed. When the warmth of the midday sun is overhead, you relax and drift off to sleep in the shade of a tree by a refreshing pool of water. As with all guided imagery exercises, choose the imagery that seems the most relaxing to you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. You may use this for sleep because it describes waking up whenever you are ready. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Magical Forest For Children Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes floating through a rainbow and experiencing different emotions with each color. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to calm yourself or to feel more confident or at peace at times when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with certain colors. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the color which will help you experience the emotion. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version The Great Desert Mindfulness This audio relaxation exercise teaches mindful awareness by describing relaxing imagery. This audio takes you for a walk in the Great Desert experiencing the beauty, heat, and sounds of the sand dunes. You return to a quiet oasis pool and fully experience the sunset over the desert. This type of relaxation has several purposes. It teaches you how to be mindfully aware of your full experience. By practicing the methods of mindfulness, you can develop a greater awareness and appreciation of your daily experiences. In addition, it will help you develop greater relaxation skills. You can use these methods to reduce the symptoms of stress, manage anxiety, and improve your sleep. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although the audio describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a car! Voice only version With music version Cityscape Mindfulness This audio relaxation exercise teaches mindful awareness by describing relaxing imagery. This audio allows you to experience the view from a rooftop in a city. As you mindfully experience the city, the sun sets and the lights of the city appear. This type of relaxation has several purposes. It teaches you how to be mindfully aware of your full experience. By practicing the methods of mindfulness, you can develop a greater awareness and appreciation of your daily experiences. In addition, it will help you develop greater relaxation skills. You can use these methods to reduce the symptoms of stress, manage anxiety, and improve your sleep. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. The audio suggests returning to full awareness whenever you are ready which allows you to use this audio to help with sleep. Do not use while operating a car! Voice only version With music version Day On the Farm Mindfulness Audio relaxation exercise intended to help achieve mindful awareness of imagery and sensations. The imagery describes a morning on the farm imagining and getting in touch with the sights, sounds, aromas, and tastes. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Rainbow Relaxation Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes floating through a rainbow and experiencing different emotions with each color. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to calm yourself or to feel more confident or at peace at times when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with certain colors. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the color which will help you experience the emotion. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Hot Springs Relaxation This audio relaxation exercise focuses on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes sitting in a hot spring in the wintertime, feeling the contrast of the cold air with the hot water, and the soothing flow of water against your body. At the end of the audio it provides an opportunity for creating healthy suggestions for yourself as you relax by the fire next to the hot spring. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This audio may be used for sleep. Just allow yourself to gently drift off. You may awaken whenever you are ready. Relaxation at bedtime allows for a more restful sleep. Do not use while operating a car! Voice only version Starry Night Relaxation Warning: Some people are uncomfortable feeling disconnected from their bodies and this relaxation can have that effect. Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes floating through space and experiencing oneness with the universe. This imagery can be quite powerful but may be disconcerting for some people. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a car! Voice only version Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Making Mistakes to Enhance Self-Esteem and Improve Performance by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The perfectionist becomes so fearful of making a mistake that he or she waits to the last possible moment when caught between two beliefs--one focused upon displeasing someone by making a mistake and the other focused upon displeasing someone by not completing the task." Tweet The vast majority of my clients with anxiety disorders are perfectionists. Additionally, perfectionism is extremely pervasive in our culture generally. However, the typical response when I inquire about perfectionism is, Oh, no, Im not a perfectionist. Im far from perfect. Such a response indicates a lack of understanding regarding the concept of perfectionism. PERFECTIONISM DEFINED Perfectionism is the belief that one must attain perfection or one is a failure. Perfectionism is an extreme distortion of the concept Do your best when an individual believes that his or her best means, perfect. The individual becomes fearful of making mistakes and may experience stress, anxiety, and depression as a result. Some typical perfectionistic beliefs include: It is absolutely necessary that everyone like me and approve of me. I must be absolutely competent and perfect in everything I undertake. If I make a mistake, I am a miserable failure. Id rather not try than to make a mistake. Its terrible to ever be embarrassed or to appear foolish. A perfect relationship is possible if I just find the right person. WHY IS PERFECTIONISM A PROBLEM? Another response I often hear from people is, Sure Im a perfectionist. Whats wrong with that? The problem is that perfectionistic beliefs undermine an individuals self-esteem and wreak havoc with relationships. Consider. Two students work hard on their term papers and both attain a 94 out of a possible 100 points earning each of them an A. Which student will feel better about him or herself? The one that comments, I did my best and I achieved a good grade, or the one that states, I wonder what I did wrong--why didnt I get 100 points? The one who overly criticizes his or her performance will feel worse. Over time, this self-critical attitude will affect performance. As perfectionistic beliefs increase an individuals stress or anxiety, his or her ability to perform complex and/or mental tasks will decrease. Thus, such attitudes affect job performance, school performance, and even everyday tasks. For instance, in the job context, an individual may become afraid to share ideas and take risks for fear of making a mistake or appearing foolish. The employee may become so focused on the details of the job that he or she becomes unable to complete a task. In fact, procrastination and paralysis are common features associated with perfectionism. The perfectionist becomes so fearful of making a mistake that he or she waits to the last possible moment when caught between two beliefs--one focused upon displeasing someone by making a mistake and the other focused upon displeasing someone by not completing the task. Additionally, a person may procrastinate as a way to save face. Its often easier to rationalize by saying, I would have done better if I had more time. In severe cases of perfectionism, the individual may experience complete paralysis. He or she may quit trying even simple tasks because the tasks become so aversive. Finally, perfectionists may find that relationships are detrimentally affected by their behavior because the perfectionist not only has high expectations for him or herself, but also for other people. This means that he or she may tend to be overly critical or demanding of other people, especially those close to him or her. IS PERFECTIONISM A COMMON PROBLEM? Although the degree of perfectionism may vary considerably from mild traits that do not interfere with an individuals functioning to severe traits that cause complete dysfunction, it is very common in this culture. In the United States, a media that has depicted perfection has heavily influenced us. We see commercials in which a woman mops floors wearing a dress and pearls. We watch television programs in which the children are always well behaved or where the problems can be resolved in 30 minutes. Print ads use models with perfect bodies and attractive features. Wherever we turn, we are inundated with the message of perfection. If we dont achieve these standards, we come to believe something is wrong with us. As a result, perfectionistic traits have become common in the population of the United States. Additionally, perfectionists are overly represented in the anxiety disorders and depressive disorders which comprise approximately 20% of the population. The perfectionism may contribute to the anxiety and depression as the individual is unable to achieve the standards he or she believes are necessary to meet. WHAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT PERFECTIONISM? First, it is important to be aware of your perfectionistic beliefs. When you are experiencing stress, depression, or anxiety, write down a description of the event and then record a list of your thoughts related to the event. For example, you have a job interview planned and you are feeling anxious. The thoughts you write may be similar to the following: What if I blow the interview? I never do well. Ill never amount to anything. Im just a failure. I may as well not even try. Once you begin to examine your thoughts on a regular basis, it will be difficult to ignore the thought process that contributes to your experience of stress, depression, or anxiety. After you become aware of these thoughts, you want to examine them and determine the irrational ideas they may contain. For instance, in the above example, the individual is engaging in catastrophic thinking, all or nothing thinking, and hopelessness. Catastrophic thinking occurs when a person thinks that the worst possible thing will happen. It can often be distinguished by what if questions. All or nothing thinking, common for perfectionists, is the belief that everything can be categorized as opposites--good/bad, black/white--with no shades of gray. Therefore, a person either succeeds or fails; there are no degrees of success. All or nothing thinking can often be detected by use of the words always or never. Hopelessness is the irrational belief that the person already knows the future outcome of his or her action and has no control over future events, and therefore, need not attempt to change the situation. The task, once you have determined your irrational thinking pattern, is to challenge and change the beliefs that contribute to your stress and dysfunction. If you have correctly identified the irrational beliefs, you can challenge them directly. For instance, with catastrophic thinking, you can state, The worst possible thing is not the thing likely to happen. For all or nothing thinking, you can state, It is not true that I always fail. When people try to change their irrational perfectionistic thinking, they often think they should be able to use these statements just once in order to change. But think of how many times you have used the perfectionistic statements in your lifetime. An adequate challenge to these beliefs must be frequent and consistent. Finally, the strongest challenge to irrational beliefs is opposing experiential evidence. In other words, you want to experience making mistakes as a positive influence in your life. Making mistakes gives us the opportunity to learn and to grow. As you overcome your fear of making mistakes, you will be able to take risks. The ability to take risks is what allows a person to be successful in a career, in sports, and in personal relationships. One way to experience mistakes is taking the opportunity to deliberately make them. First of all, identify situations that are fearful for you such as dropping papers in front of your boss or calling a colleague by the wrong name. Then, deliberately engage in the behavior while using rational self-statements to help yourself cope. One thing to remember in this process is that what one person may consider a mistake, may not bother another person. The important thing is to face lifes challenges by risking mistakes. In doing so, you will become more self-confident and will be able to accomplish more because your fears will not inhibit you. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Building Blocks Emotion Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Building Blocks Emotion Training The purpose of this audio is to help cope with certain emotional states. It can be particularly useful for those with anxiety disorders such as Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Panic Disorder. In addition, many of those with Borderline Personality Disorder may find it helpful. The imagery describes building a special place with rooms designed for different emotions: a room that helps you feel peaceful when you are anxious or tense, a room that helps you feel strong and in control when you are fearful, a room that feels comforting when you are sad, a room where you can release anger, a room that helps with concentration and focus, aroom that energizes you, a room where you can access your creative energy, hopes, and dreams, and a room designed for restful sleep. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to access or manage certain emotions when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with the imagery of the rooms that you have built. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the room which will help you manage the emotion or the state of being that you choose. For instance, if you are taking a test and need to concentrate, you can visually the room you have created for concentration to access that state. When you use this exercise repeatedly, it is best to imagine building the rooms in the same way so that the pairing becomes more powerful. However, you can add detail to the rooms to make them more vivid. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Related reading: Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Emotions More Emotion Training audios TRANSCRIPT Listen Transcript: Building Blocks Emotion Training Allow yourself to find a comfortable position, close your eyes, and begin to focus on your breathing. Notice the feel of the air as it comes into your lungs. Notice the muscles in your chest relax each time you exhale. As you focus on each breath, your breathing becomes more rhythmic. It begins to slow more and more. As your breathing slows, the muscles in your chest, your shoulders, and your neck begin to relax. More and more completely. As you continue to focus on your breathing, allow the relaxation to begin to expand throughout your body. All of the muscles in your body are beginning to smooth out and relax. Very smooth and relaxed. You feel the soothing relaxation beginning to spread throughout your body with each breath. It feels so good to breathe and allow your body to relax. More and more deeply. More and more completely. In a moment, you will begin to focus on building yourself a special place. This special place will have many rooms. Each room will allow you to focus your emotions in a different way. Now imagine that you are surrounded by building blocks. Those blocks are a mixture of colorsred, blue, green, yellow, orange, purple, black, white, and any other color that you like. The blocks are different sizes and shapes. You will use these blocks to build the special rooms. Sometimes you feel anxious, tense, or stressed. So first, you build a peaceful room. Choose a color that is peaceful for you and select the blocks that you want to use to build your peaceful room. The room can be any size that you find peaceful. Once you have built the walls and doors and windows of the room, the building blocks meld into one another and the walls become very smooth. But if you want to change the room later you can. All you need to do is imagine how you want it to change and use the blocks to create the changes. Once you have completed the room, you can add other touches to the room to make it peaceful for you. It might be pillows or pictures or comfortable rugs. Whatever you like that makes it more peaceful. Allow yourself to imagine this room completely. Even notice what you see when you look out the windows if you have any. When you come into this room, you feel at peace. If feels soothing, calming, and relaxing. You feel so at peace when you are in this room. You can feel the peacefulness flowing through your body and relaxing every part of your body. Now you are going to build a room where you feel safe because sometimes you are fearful or afraid. Choose a color that allows you to feel safe and select the blocks that you want to use to build your safe room. The room can be any size that feels safe to you. When you finish the walls, the blocks meld into one another forming a smooth surface. Now think about what else makes you feel safe and add those things to your room. If you feel safer with locks on the doors, you can add locks. If you feel safer when your favorite pet is with you, imagine that. What kind of furniture feels safe to you? If you want a lot of light, you can add lights. Whatever it is that feels safe so that when you come into this room you feel safe and secure. Very safe. Very secure. This is a room that can allow you a home base. You don't have to stay in it all the time to feel safe because you know you can return to it whenever you need to. This room allows you to go out into the world and try things that might be a little scary because you know that you can always return to this room when you need to. You always have the safety of this room available to you which allows you to explore the world. Now you can build a room where you feel strong and in control. Choose a color that allows you to feel strong and select the blocks that you what to use to build this room that strengthens you and allows you to feel in control. This room can be any size and shape that you want. Imagine the walls, the windows, the doors. When you finish the walls, the blocks meld into one another becoming a very smooth surface. Now think about the things that make you feel strong and in control and imagine those things in this room. The room feels very powerful. Whenever you come into this room you feel the strength that is inside you. You feel in control of your life and your emotions. You know you can access those feelings just by returning to this room whenever you like. You feel strong and in control. There may be times you need to feel sad. Things happen in life that are sad and you need a place to go when you feel sad. A place that is comforting. A place where it is okay to be sad, to cry, to feel what you need to feel. So choose a color that is comforting to you and select the blocks to build your room. Build a room that feels like it is wrapping its arms around you when you come into it. Think of what feels comforting to you. Maybe a favorite blanket or a favorite food. Whatever it might be, put the things that feel comforting in your room. Imagine your room completely and what it looks like. You can always add things later if you find other items that feel comforting. Whenever you come into this room you know that it is okay to feel sad. You feel sad but you can also feel the comfort from the room and everything that you have placed in it. You can come into this room when you need comfort and a place to feel sad. Sometimes you feel angry and you need a way to release your anger. It is okay to feel angry but you need to release it in a way that you don't hurt yourself or others. So choose a color that represents your anger and build a room where you can freely release your anger without hurting anyone. Once you have built your room, you can put things in your room to help release the anger. Maybe you can put a punching bag in your room. Or you can put old glass jars that are okay to break or magazines that you can tear up. Or, maybe you have a bat or a stick that you can hit against the wall. Remember this is a room you built to release your anger so you can't hurt the room or the walls. Maybe it is just a room where you can scream. Or, maybe it is a place where you can write about how you feel. However you design it, this is a room where you can go when you are angry and let your anger out in a way that doesn't hurt yourself or anyone else. Sometimes you need to be able to concentrate and focus your attention. Choose a color that reminds you of concentration, a color that helps you to focus. Select the building blocks and create a room from that color. Build a room that allows you to focus your attention. When you have finished building your walls, the blocks will meld together into a smooth surface. Now think about the things that allow you to concentrate. Is it best for the room to be empty? Or, are there certain items that help you to focus? Are there certain times when you can focus well? What allows you to focus? Are there certain activities that help you to focus your mind? Design your room to help you concentrate. When you come into this room you are able to focus your attention. Your mind is clear and you can think easily. Even the color of the room can help develop greater concentration. It reminds you to focus. Sometimes you might feel tired or fatigued and you need to feel more energized. Choose a color that represents energy for you. Select your blocks and build a room that feels energizing. You can create that room any way you like. Think of what gives you energy. Are there certain activities that energize you? Maybe there are certain items that are uplifting to you, that make you feel good. Imagine your room with these items. When you come into the room you feel energized. You want to be active. You feel alive and aware. You feel like moving. You can feel the energy flowing through you and removing the fatigue. Feel the energy of your room. You are surrounded by energy and you can allow this energy to flow into your body. You feel refreshed and able to accomplish the things you desire. Now, create a room for your dreams and creativity. A room where you can focus on what you want for your life. Where you can dream about creating the future that you want. Choose a color that allows you to dream and plan, a color that allows you to focus on possibilities for yourself. Build a room full of dreams and hopes and plans. A room where you can create. Think about the things that motivate you, that help you to dream for the future. Place those things in this room. This is a room for only positive thoughts and plans. It is a place where you believe anything is possible. When you come into this room, you feel hope about your plans and desires for the future. You feel good and capable about what you want to accomplish. Finally, create a room for sleep and rest. To sleep well, you need a room devoted to relaxing your mind and body. Choose a color that is restful and select the blocks to build your room. When you have completed the walls and doors and windows, the blocks will meld into one another to form a smooth surface. What do you want to put in your room to help you sleep? Do you need a comfortable bed? Maybe certain music or sounds helps you to sleep. Think about when you have slept the best. What was it that helped you to sleep? Design your room to include the things that feel relaxing and can help you sleep. When you come into this room, you automatically begin to relax and are easily able to fall into a restful sleep that refreshes you. When you awaken you feel refreshed and able to accomplish what you choose to do. You have now created your special place with your special rooms. Each room helps you to create the emotional state that you choose. The more you listen to this audio and the more completely you build your rooms and furnish them, you will feel the emotion created by each room. You will feel the peace, the safety, the strength of being in control, the comfort when you are sad, the release of your anger when you need to, the ability to focus your attention, the energy when you need it, your hopes and dreams, and the well-being from relaxation and rest. When you are in need of creating that emotional state, you can imagine yourself in that room even when you are not listening to this audio. Let yourself visualize it completely. Imagine yourself in the room and examining or using the things in the room. By doing so, you can access that emotional state. By building your rooms, you are developing methods of managing your emotions. You are in control of your emotions and how you choose to deal with your emotions. All emotions are okay. They have a purpose. You don't have to get rid of emotions but you want to know how to manage them. Whenever you are ready, you may come back to full awareness and open your eyes feeling refreshed and ready to use your special place whenever you need to. Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles About Excel At Life Pursuing Excellence in Life, Relationships, Sports, and Career Welcome to Excel At Life! The purpose of this website is to provide to the public research-based psychological information in a usable format to assist with each individual's pursuit of understanding and personal growth. Psychology has a wealth of untapped information that can be used for self-improvement. The belief of Excel At Life is that everyone should have access to these resources. Please browse the articles, use the audios and videos, complete the questionnaires and diaries without needing to join or pay a fee. Also, if you have an Android device, download Excel At Life's free apps for self-improvement and managing stress, anxiety, and depression. About Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Info about telehealth services with Dr. Frank Dr. Monica Frank, a clinical psychologist who has provided services to individuals with anxiety, depressive, and stress-related disorders for over 25 years in St. Louis, Missouri, USA, is the founder of Excel At Life, LLC. Previously, Dr. Frank developed and operated Behavioral Consultants, P.C., an intensive day treatment program for severe anxiety disorders in addition to an outpatient clinical practice. Her current work through Excel At Life focuses on providing the public with tools and materials from cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) which can aid in the pursuit of personal growth as well as an adjunct to treatment for anxiety, depression, and other disorders. She draws on her clinical experience, scientific research, and training in the martial arts to create these tools and other materials which include articles, audios, and Android apps. In addition to her Ph.D. in clinical psychology from St. Louis University she has extensive graduate level coursework from Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville in the area of sport psychology. Her undergraduate degree was from the University of Missouri-St. Louis. Dr. Frank's strong interest in Eastern philosophies and Buddhist psychology has led her to train in various forms of Tai Chi/Qi Gong as well as other mindfulness methods for over 15 years. She is a third degree black belt in American Kenpo and continues her involvement in martial arts at the Martial Arts Center. Help Support Excel At Life If you like this site and the materials provided and want to support the mission of Excel At Life, there are several ways you can assist: SPREAD THE WORD You can help Excel At Life's mission by letting others know about this site and the Android apps available in Google Play and the Amazon AppStore. If you post to forums, recommend Excel At Life when it is appropriate to the topic. Be sure to rate the apps if you use them. If you have a website or blog, provide a link to pages on this site. If you write a blog or article about Excel At Life, please provide us a link. MAKE A CONTRIBUTION You may support the continued development of the audios, videos, and other content by making a small contribution through PayPal. You do not need a PayPal account to use your credit card. Tap here to contribute. You may also support Excel At Life by purchasing the Excel At Life Ad-Free Support android app which provides you with an ad-free experience when using many of Excel At Life's apps. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles What Is Sport Psychology? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...misconceptions include thinking that sport psychology is for treating athletes with mental disorders or that it is simply focused on getting an athlete through a slump or that it is just fluff." Tweet Frequently, people have many misconceptions about what sport psychology is and how it is applied. These misconceptions stem from making assumptions based on a limited understanding of psychology and how it is used in applied settings. In particular, misconceptions include thinking that sport psychology is for treating athletes with mental disorders or that it is simply focused on getting an athlete through a slump or that it is just fluff. There is also a great deal of confusion about the credentials of a sport psychologist primarily because there has been controversy within the field as to the appropriate credentials. Simply speaking, sport psychology is the application of psychological principles to sport and athletes. However, in reality, understanding the field of sport psychology is more complicated. Using the term psychology in relation to psychological efforts with athletes can be both an asset as well as hindrance to understanding the field. Primarily, psychology is such a frequently used term in our society that everyone has developed a personal understanding of what it involves which has great potential of being inaccurate. The term psychology can be an asset in the application of psychological principles to sport because psychology as a field has become much more acceptable to the public. It seems that every time a person flips through the television channels they are likely to see a psychologist talking about something or other. Not only have people become more familiar with psychological concepts, they also tend to view psychologists as knowledgeable and as providing information useful to everyday life. However, the flip side is that most people know someone who sees a clinical psychologist or therapist for a mental problem. In our society there has been a stigma attached to mental problems which are frequently seen as a weakness. Therefore, many people have attached negative connotations to seeing a psychologist and may misunderstand the nature of seeing a sport psychologist. It is difficult for a relatively new field such as sport psychology to define itself especially in the minds of the public. First, the field has to demonstrate its unique contribution to both research and practice. If it is not shown to be unique, then it is subsumed under another part of the field. Sport psychology has met this criterion; in particular, without additional education and specialized training a psychologist cannot ethically or legally be described as a sport psychologist. A new field must also develop a research base to contribute to the advancement of knowledge and practice within the field. Sport psychology has been able to develop a relatively significant amount of research base in the last fifteen years; this has been aided by general experimental researchers often using athletes as an easily identifiable and obtainable population. In addition, a new field must identify criteria for professionals who practice in the field. This has been a hotly debated issue in sport psychology because there are two professional disciplines that have expertise related to sports and to psychology. One of the disciplines is psychology and the other is sport and exercise science. Psychologists who practice in the field of sport psychology typically have doctorates from clinical psychology which is focused on treating mental disorders or health psychology programs which is focused on preventing the development of illness. Sport and exercise science practitioners generally have a stronger background understanding issues directly related to sport and understanding the physiology of the body and sport. Both disciplines can be involved in research, teaching, and practicing within the field of sport psychology. The primary difference involves the direct provision of services to athletes. Although practitioners in both fields can provide mental skills training related to performance enhancement, can assess the needs of athletes, and can consult with coaches and others concerning program development, practitioners in the discipline of sport and exercise science are not trained or licensed to test or treat athletes with psychological problems that may affect performance. The major difficulty in the field is not the difference in training, but the legal use of the term psychologist which is regulated by state licensing laws and can only be used by someone who has specific training from an approved psychology program, two years of full-time experience one of which is post-doctoral, and has passed the licensing examination. This causes problems for those in sport and exercise science because they cant as clearly and succinctly identify their area of practice which can be confusing for the public. Given that public acceptance is an important challenge for a new field this creates an obstacle for the field in general because practitioners are being called by different names such as sport consultant which is not as clear in the public mind. Finally, a challenge for a new field is to develop techniques that are unique and research based. For sport psychology, most of the techniques have long been in use within clinical psychology. For this reason, sport psychology seems to be best identified as a subfield of psychology although many practitioners in the field would not agree. However, the field of sport psychology can be seen as similar to industrial-organizational (I/O) psychology which applies psychological principles to business settings. In fact, I/O psychology has developed an extensive research base and unique tests and methods of practice much more so than sport psychology. Yet, it is viewed as a subfield of psychology. Primarily, the controversy occurs because two different disciplines are practicing in the same area with many of the same methods. Neither discipline can be identified as more important because they both bring a unique background to the field which perhaps will become more cohesive and clarified in the future as more theories and methods are developed. Individuals in both disciplines have contributed to developing the research base, informing the public, and providing services. Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 10 Common Errors Made In Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download 10 Common Errors Made In Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "People don't change their thinking just because they are told to think differently...Changing your thinking is learning a new skill in the same way you learn a physical skill." Tweet In the course of my twenty-five years of clinical practice, I have found a number of common errors that can prevent cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) from being as effective as it could be. The following describes these errors and how to correct them. ERROR 1: Not Understanding the Necessity of Repetition for Change A few years back when I was lecturing a group of psychiatric residents (future psychiatrists) about using CBT with sexually traumatized clients, one of the doctors stated I tried that cognitive therapy with my patients and it doesn't work at all! As I explored with her the specifics of what she had tried with her patients, I ascertained that, basically, she had told them how they should think and then expected them to change their thinking. When I asked her what method she used to help them practice and repeat the new ways of thinking in daily life, she was speechless. I then explained that the key to successful cognitive therapy was repetition of the statements that challenge the irrational thinking and that the therapist must use a method to help clients do that. People don't change their thinking just because they are told to think differently. If that was the case, most people wouldn't need CBT because someone else has probably already told them how they should think. The difference with CBT is that a variety of methods have been developed to provide the steps to change thinking. The importance of repetition as a key component of CBT can't be emphasized enough. This is true of any new skill. When I was training for my black belt in Kenpo karate my instructor told me When you have done this self-defense move 6,000 times, it will be automatic. And he was right! At first, I was awkward and slow in executing the movements. I had to think about every aspect of each move. I thought initially that it would never be automatic. However, I continued to practice. One day (after years of training) when I was teaching one of the brown belts, I realized that I was able to automatically respond to a wrist grab and put him on the ground without even thinking about it. Changing your thinking is learning a new skill in the same way you learn a physical skill. You don't expect to be a proficient golfer without swinging the club a few thousand times. In fact, in the book Outliers by Malcolm Gladwell, he sets the magic number for success at 10,000 hours. According to Gladwell, when we examine the lives of the most successful people in any sport or profession, we typically find that they have spent at least 10,000 hours honing their craft. Certainly, that doesn't mean that it will take 10,000 hours to change your thinking and to have a positive impact on your life. In fact, with frequent repetition of the rational challenging thoughts you should notice changes in four to eight weeks. However, you will need more repetition than that for the new way of thinking to become automatic. Think of it this way. How many hours have you spent in your lifetime repeating the detrimental irrational self-talk? You likely have become very automatic in that way of thinking so now you need to re-train your brain to think in a different way. To do that you need to identify specific thoughts that are beneficial and to deliberately think those thoughts repeatedly. Sometimes it is difficult to achieve the necessary repetition especially when you are first learning. That is why reading articles about CBT or motivational thinking can be helpful. The more you read, the more repetition you obtain. Also, that is why I have created some audios that focus on changing thinking. The audios provide repetition without a great deal of effort. ERROR 2: Making Assumptions about CBT Based on Social Comparision. Many times when I first explain cognitive therapy to clients and we examine their irrational thinking and explain why it is irrational, they exclaim That makes so much sense! I've never thought about it that way before! However, for some people, once they understand the process of using irrational thought challenges, they believe that that they should just be able to think that way without having to examine their thinking and deliberately change it. They make the mistake of using social comparison assumptions. In particular, they might state I should be able to just think this way. Everyone else doesn't have to do this (referring to the CBT methods). What they don't realize is their assumptions about others not using CBT techniques is inaccurate. Just about anyone who is successful in life is using these techniques! However, they may not have been taught the techniques of CBT specifically and they may not know the terms such as mind-reading or generalizing but they are still using the methods. I tend to think that CBT is just a compendium of methods that have helped people achieve success for thousands of years. For instance, if you read the Tao te Ching examining it for cognitive concepts, you will find that it contains all the same challenges to irrational thinking and methods of successful living that you will find in any book by Aaron Beck, Albert Ellis, or David Burns. If you listen closely to people, you will begin to recognize how they apply these methods in their lives. For instance, I frequently hear people (outside of the office) say when describing a difficult event, ...but then I told myself... In other words, they were using self-talk to cope with a situation. I've also heard people say things such as Then I took a deep breath and... describing how they calmed themselves before tackling a problem. So don't assume that because you are having to learn these methods and deliberately apply them that you are doing something others don't have to do. The only difference is that you may not have learned the methods naturally while growing up and you are learning them now. You may not have had the role models or opportunities to learn these methods when you were young. People aren't naturally successful. Anyone who is successful, whether in life, sports, career, or relationships, has learned these methods at some point in their lives and are applying them routinely. ERROR 3: Not Making CBT Methods a Lifestyle Change Many people don't realize that CBT is training the brain to react differently to situations. As a result, they often mistakenly believe that recognizing the error in thinking and correcting it a few times will impact a change in their life. After they have some initial benefit they may believe that it isn't necessary to continue practicing the methods. However, cognitive-behavioral changes need to be thought of as lifestyle changes just as exercise or an effective diet is a lifestyle change. You wouldn't expect to exercise for a few months, tone your muscles, stop exercising and expect your muscles to remain toned. Nor, is it reasonable to expect to lose weight by restricting your calories but not expect to gain weight when you return to eating everything you want. A lifestyle change refers to any activity or behavior in which we engage regularly to maintain our health. In the case of the CBT methods, we make a change to improve our emotional fitness. But we can't expect that fitness or change to remain intact if we don't devote attention to practice. People have come to realize that the body needs maintenance to retain fitness and optimum health. Too often, however, people think that the brain does not require maintenance. Therefore, many people obtain initial benefits from CBT but will revert to prior thinking patterns and behaviors due to the lack of attention to the CBT methods. A good example of what may occur is the use of relaxation methods during a time of stress. The regular use of relaxation reduces the degree of stress experienced. However, many people are likely to think I feel good. I don't need to do this relaxation anymore. However, stopping the relaxation practice may result in a return of the symptoms associated with stress. Unfortunately, when this occurs some people may conclude That relaxation stuff really doesn't work! However, that is like saying exercise doesn't work because when you stop exercise you lose muscle strength. ERROR 4: Not Using Relaxation Regularly A closely associated error is that many people believe they should obtain benefits from relaxation even though they use it infrequently. I can't tell you how often clients report being stressed or anxious, yet when I ask them how often they engaged in relaxation, they respond once or not at all. The same clients, however, may report a very positive response from the relaxation when they use it. Again, the regular practice of relaxation trains the brain and the body to respond differently. This practice can create a very powerful response. You may be familiar with strong automatic negative responses. For instance, if you have been very stressed at work, you may notice your body reacting with symptoms when you drive by you place of employment on your day off. Our bodies can become conditioned to stress responses and associate the stress response with a place, person, or thing. However, our bodies can also become conditioned to the relaxation response. I had an experience once that illustrated to me just how powerful the relaxation response can be. Years ago I listened to a particular tape (before CDs and MP3s) whenever I had a stress headache. One day, years later, while I was driving and listening to the radio, my entire body suddenly relaxed. I felt an incredible, soothing peacefulness. Wondering why I suddenly felt so relaxed, I realized that one of the songs that I used to listen to was playing on the radio. My body had become conditioned to relax to that music. To be able to experience the powerful benefits of relaxation, however, it is necessary to practice regularly. ERROR 5: Expecting Results Without Practice. Very closely related to the importance of using the methods regularly, is the expectation many people have that using the methods one time should be effective. In the course of my practice, I have frequently heard a client say, I tried breathing when I was anxious and it didn't work. When I asked them how much they had practiced prior to using it for the anxiety, they have told me not at all or very little. If you were playing baseball, would you expect to hit the ball during a game if you had never tried hitting a ball before? Of course not! However, people often believe that the techniques of CBT should be effective when they have never practiced them. I think this may be due to the techniques being very similar to other normal daily behaviors so people think that they should just be able to do it without an previous training or practice. For example, they might think that since breathing is something they have done every day of their lives, they should be able to just slow it down at will. However, the fallacy here is that although they have been breathing their entire lives, they have not been regulating their breathing at will. These are two different things. To put this in perspective, if I asked you to lower your body temperature (without any artificial means such as ice) you might tell me I'm crazy, that it can't be done. But your brain has regulated your body temperature all your life just as it has regulated your breathing. So why do you believe that you can't lower your body temperature? Probably because you are not as aware of it as you are of your breathing. However, it is possible to change our physiological responses such as body temperature or blood pressure but it requires advanced practice. (And is not the topic of this articleI'm just using it to illustrate a point.) The point is that practice is necessary to achieve the ability to change our physiological responses. We can't expect to be proficient at calming ourselves if we never practice the techniques. In CBT, homework is everything! ERROR 6: Believing CBT is the Same as Positive Thinking. Another common error that people make about CBT is believing that it is all about positive thinking. I have frequently heard the remark, I've tried that positive thinkingit doesn't work. However, CBT is not about positive thinking at all. In fact, positive thinking can be just as irrational and problematic as negative thinking. For example, if someone believes Everything will be okay. I don't need to worry when a catastrophe is occurring, they may not take the necessary steps to control the situation which allows it to become worse. There are times when we need to be concerned so that we can take appropriate action. However, cognitive therapy approaches this in a realistic manner. If we are worrying about something that is not likely to occur, then we are making ourselves feel bad about something for little reason. Therefore, CBT is practical and realistic. It is about assessing our thinking so that we can take the most reasonable approach. ERROR 7: Believing That Emotions Are Always Irrational. Sometimes people take CBT too far and believe If I'm completely rational, I won't feel anything. In fact, I heard Albert Ellis, one of the founding fathers of cognitive therapy, state this idea at a seminar. He said that if we are always rational, we would never be angry. I hope I misunderstood his statement because I disagree with this concept. We are emotional beings. Emotions are an important part of our information processing system. Emotions allow us to be aware of problems that need to be addressed. So I neither believe that normal human beings can be completely free of emotions nor do I believe that it is healthy for us to not have emotions. Without emotions we can miss very important information in our environment. For example, if you are threatened on a dark street late at night, what do you think reacts first? Do you think your emotions react first warning you of danger? Or do you intellectually assess the situation first? The initial emotional reaction prepares us to flee or to fight. The intellectual response is to determine what might be the better decision. Certainly, our emotions can cause us to over-react. For instance, on that dark street you might feel threatened when you really aren't. And that is where CBT can help. It helps us to learn to keep our emotions in perspective and to recognize when we may be over-reacting. However, it should not be used to prevent emotions completely. Many CBT therapists are finding standard CBT too limiting in this regard and there has been much movement to mindfulness-based CBT, often referred to as MBCT. MBCT focuses more on learning to tolerate the various emotional states through mindfulness approaches rather than trying to eliminate them. The intellectualized approach in standard CBT can be problematic for people who already have a more analytical style with avoidance of emotions. ERROR 8: Placing Demands on Rationality As people learn about CBT, sometimes they come to believe that if being rational is good and benefits their life, they might place a demand on themselves: I SHOULD be completely rational all of the time. Now, if you know anything about cognitive therapy, you know that this statement is irrational in itself for several reasons. One, is that it is a perfectionistic demand. Such demands are impossible to achieve which then causes additional distress and dysfunction. Cognitive therapy is about decreasing stress by being realistic in our expectations of ourselves. Another reason this statement is irrational is because it is black-and-white reasoning which is the idea that if something is bad, the opposite should be good. But this isn't the case either. CBT is about finding balance whereas black-and-white thinking is about extremes. Even CBT when done to the extreme can be unhealthy. I have often had this issue with my anxious clients. When we work on exposures to anxiety-provoking situations so that they can desensitize to the situation, they may come to believe that it is always good to challenge anxiety. In other words, if you are afraid of something, you need to face it. But that is not true because sometimes challenging a fear unnecessarily can cause more harm than good. In particular, this attitude can cause unnecessary stress which may interfere with someone challenging the fears that are important to face. A person needs to evaluate a fear, determine in what way and how much it affects satisfaction in life, and then decide whether it needs to be dealt with. If I have a fear of snakes that doesn't really affect my life much, why should I face it? However, if it prevents me from doing something that is very important to me such as riding my bike on a wooded path, then I might choose to face it. ERROR 9: Using CBT to Justify Not Being Responsible for Change. Another area where people need to be cautious with CBT is using it as a justification to not change or try. Although CBT teaches a person to appreciate all aspects of themselves, it is meant to be used for building a foundation that provides a stable base from which a person can make changes. Practitioners of CBT believe that if you feel good about yourself, you will have greater confidence to try new things and to make improvements. You are more able to acknowledge your flaws or areas in need of improvement without that acknowledgment causing you to feel bad. So we teach acceptance of yourself. However, some people may use this concept as justification for not taking responsibility to make changes: I am fine just the way I am. Or, they may focus on only a very specific aspect of a cognitive belief without considering the complexity of the situation. For instance, if I tell a woman Certainly, you have the right to expect your husband to help with half the housework, but all rights come with consequences and you also need to consider the consequences of that demand and determine how it affects your marriage I might soon hear from her husband saying that his wife told him that he should help with half the housework! She ignored the rest of the challenge to her thinking. My point here is that CBT shouldn't be used as a justification for behavior that is unhealthy or inappropriate. It is meant to help a person examine thoughts and choices so as to improve satisfaction with life and with relationships. It is not meant to help a person to continue problematic behaviors. So even if the words are the same, it may not always mean the same thing. You need to look at the underlying meaning as well. In other words, a should is not always a should. And to paraphrase Freud*, Sometimes a should is just a should (and nothing else). ERROR 10: Placing Demands on Mindfulness Another frequent error is the tendency to place expectations or demands on the practice of mindfulness. The problem with this is that demands prevent the experience of mindfulness so the more we try to be mindful the less we are able to be mindful. I experienced this years ago as a college student. During a womens' retreat, we were instructed to listen to some music to allow us to experience imagery to develop personal understanding. As I am lying on the mat and trying to allow the music to create images, I became very frustrated. I thought I'm not having any images! Nothing is occurring! Everyone else is going to experience something and share what they are experiencing. And I have nothing! How embarrassing! This is a waste of time. As you can see, I was not mindful at all. Of course no images occurred. I was so caught up in my (irrational) thinking that I couldn't be mindful. Finally, in frustration, I gave up. I said to myself I don't care! I'm just going to listen to the music and not worry about trying to have any images. As I continued to listen to the music and let all my thoughts drift away, I suddenly had one of the most powerful images that has guided my life to this day. More importantly, I learned the critical concept of not trying to be mindful. Instead of trying to be mindful, learn to allow yourself to be mindful. The more you remove the demand of mindfulness, the more you will achieve it. * Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis, who tended to analyze the meaning of everything, has been attributed to say Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar. Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles How Social Are You? The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses personality characteristics that are related to how social you are. Specifically, it rates how extroverted or introverted you are based on several scales including gregariousness, friendliness, talkativeness, and sociability. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: The Secret to Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happiness is an Attitude Happy Friends Can Improve Your Health Can a Gratitude List Make a Difference in Your Life? Assertion 101: Remain Calm In Praise of Specific Praise Assertion 101: The Importance of Eye Contact Assertion 101: You Have the Right to Say I Don't Care People-pleasing 101 Assertion 101: Don't Apologize for a Request Assertion 101: Just Say No More questionnaires: List of PsychTests Your Happiness Assessment Cognitive Styles Test Self-Esteem Self-Efficacy For authors and more information: Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R., & Gough, H. C. (2006). The International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84-96. International Personality Item Pool: A Scientific Collaboratory for the Development of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences (http://ipip.ori.org/). Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Have you ever felt anxiety symptoms even when you really weren't fearful of something? Your heart started pounding for no reason? Tweet If you have anxiety problems you have likely experienced anxiety even when you knew there was no rational reason for the anxiety. Perhaps you weren't even truly afraid. Yet, your heart still started pounding and your breathing became more rapid. Or, you felt tension build up in your shoulders. You might ask "Why am I reacting when there's nothing to be afraid of?" For a couple of years after I had completed graduate school I still had a stress reaction whenever I drove past the campus. Even though I knew I didn't need to be anxious or stressed, I still reacted automatically. Graduate school had been pretty stressful. We used to joke, If you can survive this, you can be a psychologist! So, during graduate school my body was in a chronic survival mode and had become conditioned upon seeing the campus to be stressed. Why did this continue to occur after graduation even though I knew there was no reason to be stressed any longer? The development of a conditioned response In 1920 John Watson and Rosalie Rayner published a study about creating a phobia in an infant. The procedure (which would be considered unethical by today's standards) involved making a loud noise behind the infant to cause a startle reaction every time he tried to touch a white rat. Although initially unafraid of the rat, after several pairings of the noise and the rat Little Albert began to cry and crawl away every time the rat was presented to him. In addition, the phobia generalized so that he became fearful of other types of white fuzzy objects. Typically, we think of fear as an emotion based on irrational thoughts in reaction to a situation. However, fear can be a biologically conditioned response. For instance, when Little Albert was startled by the loud noise, the stress hormone cortisol was released by his system. Similarly, my stress reaction had been conditioned by the chronic stress of graduate school so that the sensory input of seeing the campus triggered the biological stress reaction in me years later. The flight or fight response to threat involves a number of physical processes and reactions including the release of cortisol, increased heart rate and blood pressure, rapid breathing, sweating, constriction of the blood vessels and dilation of the pupils. The initial response is for the body to prepare the immune system to fight any foreign substances that could attack the system if physically injured. Cortisol is released to increase energy, to quiet the immune response, and to shut down any unnecessary physical processes such as digestion. Such a response prepares a person to deal with the threat that has been encountered. However, our brains don't distinguish between a real-world threat and an imagined threat. As a result our bodies respond in the same way if a dog is attacking or if we are giving a public speech or if we are remembering an event. Repeated encounters with the threatening event causes the brain to become conditioned and automatically release cortisol whenever the event or even the memory of the event occurs. Thus, even a memory of a fearful situation can release cortisol into the system and cause the cascade of physical symptoms. Why cognitive restructuring works For the biological process to initiate, the brain must first view the event as a threat. Cognitive restructuring changes the thinking about the situation so a person can learn to regard it as non-threatening. For instance, if a person is afraid of public speaking, education can help change the thinking. Learning that most other people feel the same, that making mistakes during speeches is normal and other people are likely to feel sympathetic, and that embarrassment isn't life-threatening but just a momentary discomfort can help the person reappraise the situation. The unfortunate part of this process for those with anxiety is that the fear response can occur without direction from the thinking part of the brain. Even when a person recognizes the fear is excessive and is willing to face the feared situation, the automatic biological process may still occur if the fear has already been established. For example, the person has tried to speak in public previously but each time was over-whelmed by the physical symptoms (rapid heart beat, trouble breathing, sweating) and couldn't continue. If such is the case, the person needs assistance with controlling the biological response. Read more: How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? Why relaxation combined with exposure to the feared situation works To prevent the automatic release of cortisol that triggers the cascade of biological events and symptoms it is necessary to retrain the brain at a biological level. Gradual desensitization is an exposure method in which the person confronts the feared situation little by little while in a relaxed state. By maintaining relaxation, cortisol is not released into the system (or is released in a more controlled fashion) so that the automatic fear response can be reversed. However, it is important to do such exposures in a controlled manner because if done incorrectly it can lead to strengthening the fear response. For example, I once had a client who experienced panic attacks in a mall because he felt too far away from the safety of his vehicle. He did very well with controlled systematic exposures. But unfortunately, too well. He became so excited about being able to be in the mall without panic that he went in further than we had planned and immediately had a panic attack which set him back in his treatment. Read more: 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety: Gradual Desensitization In depth: How the stress hormone cortisol is involved in the development of fear-based memories When a person is confronted by a threatening situation, physical readiness and energy is required to run away from or to fight the danger. Even in the case of non-physically threatening events energy is needed to deal with the situation. To increase energy the brain increases the blood glucose and suppresses unnecessary systems of the body such as digestion which is not required during a confrontation. Suppressing these systems allows the energy to be available to the organ systems required to manage the threat. For instance, heart rate and respiration is increased and the muscular system is prepared so the body can react quickly. The first step in this process is the amygdala receives sensory input (sights, sounds, smells, etc) from the outside world and initiates what we experience as the startle response to danger. This sensory information may bypass the cortex (which evaluates threat) and instead causes an automatic reaction. The amygdala is located in the limbic system of the brain and directs the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system to increase physical readiness (breathing, heart rate, etc). Shortly afterward cortisol is released which increases the glucose for energy and suppresses the non-vital organ systems so that energy is not used unnecessarily. The individual experiences these physical changes as excitement, anxiety, or fear and may report discomfort from the physical changes such as stomach upset because the digestive process was interrupted. Athough cortisol is involved in reducing the inflammatory symptoms, in the case of a chronic (ongoing) stress reaction, the failure of cortisol can cause a pro-inflammatory effect. From the body/brain's point of view, inflammation is a beneficial process that helps to fight foreign invaders. However, chronic inflammation can become a problem in itself as it can increase the experience of pain and/or discomfort throughout the system. As a result, this process can condition fear-based memories. For example, if a person is shocked (pain stimulus) every time an image of a harmless black snake appears on a screen, eventually the person's body will automatically react as if that image is a threat even when no shock occurs. The initial shocks cause the release of cortisol because the body is being threatened and the fear-based memory of the shock is created by the pairing of the image with the shock. In this way, the body reacts to the image automatically even if the person knows a shock will not occur. Not only that but generalization will occur as the brain triggers a reaction to anything that is similar such as a black hose. The result of fear-based memories is that a person reacts even when they are aware that no danger is present. Counter-acting this process has to involve re-conditioning the biological system to not react. Thus, cognitive-behavioral therapy can be an effective method to change this reaction. Read more: A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help Hannibal, K. and Bishop, M.D. (2014). Chronic Stress, Cortisol Dysfunction, and Pain: A Psychoneuroendocrine Rationale for Stress Management in Pain Rehabilitation. Physical Therapy, 94, 1816-1825. DOI:10.2522/ptj.20130597 Vinik AI, Maser RE, Ziegler D. (2011). Autonomic imbalance: prophet of doom or scope for hope? Diabetic Medicine, 28, 643651. DOI:10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.03184.x Copyright 2018 by Excel At Life, LLC Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Lies You Were Taught as a Child If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training with Music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Building Blocks Emotion Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Learning to Tolerate Anxiety If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Audios to Assist with PTSD Lies You Were Taught as a Child Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Building Blocks Emotion Training Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Lies You Were Taught as a Child This audio is to assist those who have been emotionally abused as a child. It discusses the lies you were told as a child by the abuser which can continue to affect your adult life. Learn how to refute these lies. If you have experienced these lies as a child, listening to this audio repeatedly can help you begin to change the impact of these lies in your life. The more you recognize that what you were told was a lie and learn to counter these lies, the more you can create a more fulfilling life. Also, using Excel At Life's Self Esteem Blackboard app can help you to challenge the inaccurate beliefs that you have about yourself because of the lies that were told you as a child. TRANSCRIPT Listen Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate Those who have been severely hurt or traumatized by others often have problems with trust. They may distrust everyone or trust someone too much. This audio discusses the concept of trust and to learn to discriminate. In other words, learning how much you can trust someone and to what degree you can trust them. In this way, you can examine others motives and behaviors more realistically and decide whether they are someone who you want in your life. This audio, in combination with other audios and resources on this site can help you with problems of distrust. However, as with all the resources, it is best to review the transcript with a mental health professional to determine if it is appropriate for your situation. TRANSCRIPT Listen Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma This audio provides assistance when you are overwhelmed with anxiety and can't focus on relaxation especially if you are experiencing depersonalization or derealization (you or your surroundings don't feel real). The grounding technique can be particularly helpful when someone has anxiety due to trauma which is causing flashbacks to the memory of the trauma. It has you focus on your immediate surroundings to help focus away from the traumatic memory. This type of audio is not for the purpose of relaxation but to help you feel more focused so that you can use other techniques. Once you have used the mindful grounding technique and can focus a bit more, it is a good idea to use the relaxation audios to help calm yourself further. It is best to listen to this audio for the first time when you don't need it so that you will have an idea of what to expect. In addition, developing an understanding of mindfulness can help with this practice: Understanding Mindfulness. TRANSCRIPT Listen Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes floating through a rainbow and experiencing different emotions with each color. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to calm yourself or to feel more confident or at peace at times when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with certain colors. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the color which will help you experience the emotion. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Additional reading: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Emotionss Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Building Blocks Emotion Training The purpose of this audio is to help cope with certain emotional states. It can be particularly useful for those with anxiety disorders such as Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Panic Disorder. In addition, many of those with Borderline Personality Disorder may find it helpful. The imagery describes building a special place with rooms designed for different emotions: a room that helps you feel peaceful when you are anxious or tense, a room that helps you feel strong and in control when you are fearful, a room that feels comforting when you are sad, a room where you can release anger, a room that helps with concentration and focus, aroom that energizes you, a room where you can access your creative energy, hopes, and dreams, and a room designed for restful sleep. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to access or manage certain emotions when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with the imagery of the rooms that you have built. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the room which will help you manage the emotion or the state of being that you choose. For instance, if you are taking a test and need to concentrate, you can visually the room you have created for concentration to access that state. When you use this exercise repeatedly, it is best to imagine building the rooms in the same way so that the pairing becomes more powerful. However, you can add detail to the rooms to make them more vivid. Do not use while operating a vehicle! TRANSCRIPT Listen Learning to Tolerate Anxiety This educational audio helps you to understand the concept of tolerating anxiety and why it is important. The fear of the anxiety and the demand to get rid of it makes the anxiety worse. The more you learn to tolerate anxiety, the less intense and frequent it will be. Developing mindfulness skills increases the ability to tolerate anxiety because mindfulness focuses on the immediate present not on the catastrophic worries about the future. The more that you focus on the "what ifs" regarding anxiety, the more likely your anxiety will be triggered. However, the more you can can understand and accept the anxiety, the less insistent it becomes. TRANSCRIPT Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training: Teaching Self-Correction by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence." Tweet The following article is part of a series of articles that focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review. Assessing performance and correcting errors are important internal skills for the martial arts student to develop. But how does one develop this skill? To do so, the martial arts instructor needs to consciously teach skill just as he or she teaches proper execution of a side kick or using faking techniques during sparring. However, teaching the development of using internal sources of information for feedback may be something many martial arts instructors were not taught themselves. So often when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence. For effective learning to occur, the individual must receive feedback regarding performance. That feedback can be external from a teacher or videotape or a test, or it can be internal observations by the individual learner. Without feedback of some type the individual may not learn at all or may learn incorrect information. However, the problem that can occur with teaching is that feedback from the instructor regarding acceptable performance can make the student more dependent upon such feedback. Past research tended to focus primarily on the importance of external feedback; however, more recent research indicates that internal feedback can be even more important than external feedback when the student knows the skills but is working on consistently implementing correct performance. In addition, research has indicated that frequent feedback may increase the students dependence upon feedback from the instructor and that when the instructor is not present performance decreases due to the lack of reliance on the students internal sources of information. How can the martial arts instructor encourage the process within the student of developing internal methods of feedback? The first step in any type of teaching physical skills, of course, involves providing the student with a standard of correct technique and how to perform the technique. This can be given through demonstration, videotapes, written materials, or physically guiding the student through the process. Often a combination of these methods can be most effective. Once the student has learned the basic skill and is in the process of perfecting performance, the issue of teaching the student to self-correct errors becomes crucial. The following suggestions may be useful in teaching this process: 1) If the instructor notices the student reacting to an error such as through a nonverbal grimace or a verbal statement, he/she can ask the student what the student noticed and how the error can be corrected. This forces the student to focus on the internal information that was apparent to the student and to develop a plan for solving the problem. In addition, it provides the instructor a chance to assess the students internal perfectionistic demands and to help the student reframe those self-statements. 2) Teaching the martial arts student to use internal sources of feedback can be accomplished by asking the student questions regarding his/her performance prior to giving the student feedback. At first, these questions need to be very specific to help the student focus on different aspects of the performance. For instance, questions could include, Did you maintain a low stance? or Did your punch fully extend? In the case of correct assessment of performance, the instructor can indicate agreement with the students assessment. However, if the student is unaware of certain performance errors or incorrectly identifies errors, the instructor could then explain proper performance. This method allows student to become more observant and aware of their movements and performance. 3) An extension of the above process would be to have the student evaluate their performance by using a videotape or mirror as a source of feedback. However, these methods are external sources of feedback similar to an instructors feedback and shouldnt be relied upon to the exclusion of internal information sources. They can best be used as an intermediate step in teaching the student to rely more on internal cues or when the skill being assessed is more complex. Some students may be initially unaware of the internal cues and may need the assistance of the visual information. 4) By following the above procedures, the instructor is also reducing the frequency of external feedback which is replaced by greater reliance on the students internal information. However, the instructor still needs to provide encouragement by praising specific correct actions and successes. To do so, the instructor needs to provide specific information such as You are increasing the speed of your punches rather than generic Good punch. Using this type of teaching method requires more work on the instructors part and may be more difficult to implement in a group setting. However, it pays off through greater student motivation and accurate self-assessment when the instructor is not present which in the long run improves learning skills and performance. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Self-Efficacy and Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy We all have a sense of self. Whether that sense of self is positive or negative is based upon our experiences in life and our perceptions and assessment of ourself. If our self assessment was always accurate, I would have no need to write this article. However, the problem is that our perception of ourself is often distorted. Previous experiences can distort this perception. For instance, a person growing up in a perfectionistic family may view herself as always falling short of the expectations of the family. As a result, no matter how successful she might be, she thinks of herself as a failure. Or a boy who is constantly picked on by his older brothers: "How stupid!" or "What a dork!" He may come to believe these labels about himself. Unfortunately, people who believe certain labels will often live up, or live down, to those labels. The labels can create a self-fulfilling prophecy of expectation. He expects himself to be stupid so he never tries to prove otherwise. WHAT IS SELF-CONCEPT? The self-concept is a factual description of how you perceive yourself. If your perception is distorted, this description may not be an accurate depiction of you, but it IS an accurate statement of what you believe about yourself. The self-concept is derived from self-esteem and self-efficacy. If a person has low self-esteem, the self-concept may be skewed in the direction of a negative description. Some aspects of the self-concept may be purely statements of fact such as "I have a college education" or "I don't dance" without any evaluation of whether it is good or bad. Read more... "...refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity." Without confidence in ones ability, an individual cannot perform to his or her potential. It is even possible that someone with lesser ability, but with confidence, can outperform this person because belief in oneself can be a powerful influence. What is this sense of confidence? Albert Bandura refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity. The concept of self-efficacy has often been used interchangeably with the concept of self-esteem which is the process of evaluating the self; however, self-efficacy is more accurately described as a precursor to self-esteem and is mediated by the individuals self-attributions. Read more... The vast majority of my clients with anxiety disorders are perfectionists. Additionally, perfectionism is extremely pervasive in our culture generally. However, the typical response when I inquire about perfectionism is, Oh, no, Im not a perfectionist. Im far from perfect. Such a response indicates a lack of understanding regarding the concept of perfectionism. Perfectionism is the belief that one must attain perfection or one is a failure. Perfectionism is an extreme distortion of the concept Do your best when an individual believes that his or her best means, perfect. The individual becomes fearful of making mistakes and may experience stress, anxiety, and depression as a result. Read more... PsychNotes 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Selfies: A Sign of Low Self-esteem? Think Again Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Empathy Requires a Strong Sense of Self Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem "Common Sense" Approach to Praise Can Worsen Self-esteem in Vulnerable Children Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Self-Esteem Blackboard Free Android App: Use cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods to improve your self-esteem!Do you have low self-esteem? Does it affect your relationships? Does it prevent you from being successful at work? Are you unhappy with yourself? Do you have problems with anxiety and/or depression? Then, this app may be for you. This app was developed by a clinical psychologist using the methods of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) to help improve self-esteem. Contents: Articles about self-esteem and cognitive-behavioral therapy Test: What Is Your Self-Concept? Create positive self-talk on the the Self-Esteem Blackboard Review the affirmations on your blackboard Self-Esteem Assistance Audio to change self-talk created by past experiences Self-Esteem Blackboard Audio to help visualize changing your self-talk Relaxation audios Install Although we may prefer to believe that learning a motor skill is purely learning a set of physical techniques, we have to consider that most learning typically takes place in the context of an interpersonal relationship with a teacher. The critical question is how does this interaction affect the development of motor skills. It appears that the mediating factor between the presentation of the instructions by the teacher and the performance of the skill by the student may be the cognitive process of self-efficacy (Escarti & Guzman, 1999). Some may argue that the development of effective skills may lead to the increased self-efficacy demonstrated by students of high ability. Although this process occurs, it is not sufficient for explaining the role of developing self-efficacy and its impact on learning motor skills. To fully explain the role of self-efficacy, we must evaluate the interpersonal context of how the teacher or coach provides feedback to the athlete, how that feedback affects self-efficacy, and how self-efficacy enhances performance. Unfortunately, studies directly examining this relationship are sparse, and therefore, the inferences need to be made based on research examining the relation of the different components of the equation such as the feedback/self-efficacy relationship and the self-efficacy/motor skills relationship. Read more... A natural human tendency is to simplify explanations, especially explanations regarding the behavior of other people. Even science teaches the importance of being parsimonious; in other words, dont use a complex explanation when a simple one will do. However, many times we over-simplify the cause of behavior, both as individuals and as a science. In social psychology, a concept known as "the fundamental attribution error" describes the tendency to view too much of someone elses behavior as related to internal factors. For instance, if a person is fired from a job, we may think, "That person is incompetent," even though we could as easily think, "That job was not right for that person." We tend to believe that the problems other people have are due to some internal fault or flaw and we tend to over-estimate the degree of the person's responsibility. Read more... Low self-esteem has been implicated in most psychological dysfunction; however, low self-esteem is not necessarily the root cause of this dysfunction. It is believed (Aro, 1994) that individuals with high self-esteem who may be predisposed to psychological disorders are better equipped to cope with those disorders, and thus, reduce the negative consequences that may result. Therefore, if self-esteem can be enhanced, the psychological consequences of disorders can be reduced. This process can be illustrated by describing a similar process that occurs with physical illness such as diabetes. The individual may be genetically predisposed to developing the illness, but if they engage in the proper healthy care-taking activities, they may prevent the development of the illness or, at least, reduce its consequences (Amir et. al., 1990. The enhancement of self-esteem and self-efficacy can be an important contributing factor to both the prevention of psychological and physical illness and the maintenance of health. Read more... The manner in which instructors provide feedback to athletes can have significant impact upon an athlete's self-efficacy which in turn affects the ability to learn a skill and the overall performance. Self-efficacy is the athlete's personal belief that he or she has the capability to learn and perform a specific skill or activity. The results of an interesting study by Amparo Escarti and Jose Guzman in 1999 indicated that performance feedback which focuses on providing feedback regarding technique rather than evaluating outcome was related to increased self-efficacy, a higher level of performance, and the tendency to choose more difficult tasks. Other research has shown that a higher level of self-efficacy improves performance. Thus, research shows us that how a coach provides feedback to athletes is critical in the development of the athlete. To make this issue all the more complicated, there is research evidence that women respond differently than men to feedback from coaches. This is most likely a crucial point in the martial arts today because the majority of instructors in the martial arts are men and there are more and more women choosing to participate and compete in the martial arts. Therefore, a martial arts instructor needs to be more attuned to the methods of providing feedback to women in order to elicit their best performance as well as to keep them interested in continuing their training. Read more... Some people may be curious as to why this website is dedicated to the "pursuit of excellence" when I am constantly warning about the dangers of perfectionism. To address this question we must differentiate between the pursuit of excellence and the need to be perfect. These concepts are not only different but can be considered antagonistic to one another. In fact these concepts are so opposed to one another that excellence can best be attained by giving up the demands of perfection. What is Perfectionism? Perfectionism is the individual's belief that he or she must be perfect to be acceptable. Perfectionism is black and white with no gray area. Anything other than perfect is failure. Perfectionism is an attitude, not necessarily a behavior. In other words, two people can engage in the same behavior such as trying to win an Olympic gold medal but one can be pursuing excellence and the other is demanding perfection. The difference lies in the thought process about the goal or behavior, not in the goal or behavior itself. Read more... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles The Worry Box Technique by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet "When we develop the belief that we can handle whatever problems life offers us, we have less need to worry." What is Worry? Worry is not about the present moment. Instead, worry focuses on the past or the future. Worry catastrophizes about imagined possibilities. It's lying awake at might thinking What if? In fact, worry is one of the primary causes of insomnia. Worry also can be about past events, although it is still about future outcomes. For instance, if a person is worried about not doing a job well enough, he or she is really worried about a future consequence of that behavior. When we dwell on past mistakes or events, it is usually because we are blaming ourselves or we are fearful that others will blame us. Problems Caused by Worry 1) Insomnia. Insomnia is a common problem due to excessive worrying. When many people lie down to sleep they begin to think of problems that bother them or review concerns about what they need to do the next day. However, to fall asleep and to obtain good rest, we need to be relaxed. The more we worry, the more our body tenses and our breathing rate increases. As a result, we have difficulty falling asleep. An additional problem that frequently occurs in these situations, is worry about not being able to sleep. As a result, the individual creates what they are worried about: the more worry, the less sleep. 2) Avoidance. Many people who worry about possible negative outcomes will tend to avoid situations. For example, a person worried about failing a college class may not even enroll in the class. Or a man who is worried that a woman he likes will turn him down if he asks her on a date doesn't even bother asking. When people worry, they imagine the worst possible outcome. A consequence of dwelling on negative possibilities is the increased belief in the probability of negative outcomes. As a result, people miss out on opportunities due to the worry and the avoidance. 3) Self-Fulfilling Prophecy. A self-fulfilling prophecy is when a person creates the outcome that he/she believes will occur. Although this can occur for both negative and positive thinking, we are concerned about the negative thinking for this article. For example, a woman may be convinced that if she goes to a party no one will talk to her. The thought causes her to send negative non-verbal signals to others that may actually cause others to avoid her. Such signals can include not looking at others, having a negative expression, and not approaching others. Thus, this person creates a self-fulfilling prophecy and becomes further convinced of her original belief. See, I tried but no one talked to me. 4) Pain. Worry can literally lead to physical pain. The cause is due to the increased muscular tension caused by worry. The most common kind of pain may be headaches but a variety of painful conditions can result from worry. 5) Relationship Conflicts. Worry can frequently create problems in relationships. Not only can the negativity be frustrating for others, but the worrier may also try to control others to prevent the outcomes he/she is worried about. Others may even avoid the worrier. For example, once when I was purchasing clothes at a department store, the cashier was extremely negative and expressed numerous catastrophic concerns during our short interaction. I found it very unpleasant. The next time I went shopping, I consciously avoided going to her counter. Coping with Worry Thus, due to the impact that worry can have on our lives, it is critical to learn methods to reduce worry. The two primary methods of controlling worry are learning relaxation methods and changing our thinking. Relaxation methods reduce the tension in our bodies. It is very difficult to be relaxed and worried at the same time. Our brain interprets the relaxed state of the body as meaning there is nothing to worry about. As a result, we are less likely to dwell on the negative thoughts. Another method that can be relaxing but also helps with thinking is mindfulness. Developing mindfulness is learning to be more present in the moment of our experience rather than be concerned about past or future events. The cognitive method of coping with worry is learning to change the underlying irrational thinking. The most common type of thinking related to worry is fixed desire which is the belief that we must have life a certain way so we can be happy. The problem with this thinking is that life frequently doesn't occur in the way we think it should so we are more likely to be unhappy and worried. The Worry Box Technique A method to help you cognitively sort through your worries is the worry box technique which helps you evaluate your worries and then mentally put them away by using coping statements. To sort through the worries you first determine if they are important and controllable or uncontrollable. Then you can mentally imagine a box to lock away your worries (listen to Worry Box audio) or you can even write them down and put them in a physical box. 1) Is the Worry Important? Too often, people expend tremendous energy on unimportant worries. To determine if something is important, examine the worry. Ask yourself: Will this affect my life in any significant way? Is it likely to occur? If your answer is no to these questions, then the worry is unimportant. You are worrying about something that probably won't occur, or if it does, won't have much impact in your life. If you determine that the worry is unimportant, you can eliminate the worry by reminding yourself that it is unimportant and not worth your time even thinking about it. For example, one time I had called someone by the wrong name and was worried about making that mistake and what the person might be thinking/feeling. Finally, I told myself, If she is thinking about this as long as you are, then she has more of a problem than you do. In other words, it really wasn't something to worry about. 2) Is the Worry Controllable? If the worry is important, you then need to determine if the worry is controllable. If it is, the process of coping with it is fairly straight-forward. First, identify the steps you need to take to control the situation. Then, you begin to take the necessary steps. Write the steps down so that if you start worrying, you can remind yourself that you have a plan that you are following. I just need to focus on the step I can work on now. The outcome will be based on my work now. The most difficult situation is a worry that is important, but not controllable. However, be sure to fully examine the worry before you determine that it is uncontrollable. Sometimes aspects of the worry may be controllable. And if you focus on those controllable aspects, the outcome of the situation may change. You may need to be creative in how you approach the situation. Or, sometimes a situation may be controllable if you make certain changes but don't want to due to the difficulty of the change. For example, a person might be worried about the health consequences of having diabetes but doesn't make the necessary changes to improve his/her health. 3) What If It Really Is Important, But Uncontrollable? The only thing we can do about an uncontrollable situation is to change our thinking to cope with the situation. Often, this may have to do with our philosophy of life. For instance, when I'm faced with a difficult situation, I try to remind myself that the worst moments of my life contained the seeds for the best moments of my life. In other words, I know that if certain events that I identified as bad at the time had not occurred, certain other events that I have identified as good wouldn't have occurred either. I don't think any of us have the big perspective of how everything is supposed to fit together. We only have what we think it should be which is usually related to us not wanting to suffer. However, suffering is part of life. We can't escape it. But we can determine how we will handle it. Some people do this through their spiritual beliefs. Some people do this through their connection with others. Some people do this through letting go of the demand on life and learning to live mindfully in the present. However it is done, it involves our thinking about ourselves and our philosophy of life. I've heard people use coping statements such as God doesn't give me more than I can handle or This is a life lesson that can provide me with direction. What Does this Have to Do with Worry? When we develop the belief that we can handle whatever problems life offers us, we have less need to worry. Worry occurs due to the demand that everything should be okay. When we believe that we can cope with problems, we don't need to dwell on the what if's? Those concerns become unimportant. The more we can believe that all life experience is worthwhile we don't need to seek only positive experiences and avoid negative ones. Too often, the avoidance of what we classify as bad experiences can prevent opportunities and limit our lives. If you talk to successful people, they often don't even classify events into bad or good because every experience can contribute to the achievement of their goals. They are willing to take risks even if it involves unpleasantness. They can tolerate adversity and grow stronger as a result. Changing your philosophy of life can help control worry. However, this may be particularly difficult for individuals who have anxiety or depressive disorders and may require professional assistance. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training: Assessing and Coping With Injuries by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...learn how to assess the seriousness of the injury and how to cope with a temporary change in their activities as well as how to deal with a career ending injury." Tweet The following article is part of a series of articles that focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review Athletes typically have a great deal of difficulty adjusting to injuries especially those that prevent them from engaging in their particular sport. Much of their sense of self is connected to their sport. An injury can cause disruption to their usual routine and prevent the self-satisfaction and accomplishment they experience through their sport. As a result, they often experience a sense of loss, confusion, and irritability or frustration when they are injured. This article is not just for those athletes who have already experienced an injury because it is important for every athlete to prepare for eventual injuries and learn how to assess the seriousness of the injury and how to cope with a temporary change in their activities as well as how to deal with a career ending injury. Martial artists, in particular, have trouble accepting and handling injuries. They are frequently taught to ignore pain so as to not let their opponent know of a weakness. Often they become very skilled at ignoring the warning signals provided by pain and they may tend to minimize pain which can lead to problems of not recognizing the seriousness of an injury. Pain is an important signal from the brain that there may be a problem somewhere in the body. When people do not experience pain such as due to a neurological dysfunction, they can experience severe consequences including crippling injuries that could have been prevented and fatal or limb-threatening infections. Therefore, we need to view pain not as a sign of weakness but as a messenger. And as it is with all messengers, some can be ignored but others need to be heeded. However, we should not decide to ignore a messenger until we have at least heard the message. The signal of pain needs to be attended to if only to assess the cause and to determine whether further action needs to be taken. Often pain is an early warning signal that when paid attention to can prevent further serious injury. Experienced fighters have likely developed the ability to quickly assess the pain and determine a course of action. However, martial arts instructors need to be careful with their novice fighters. Rather than have them ignore the pain signals, they can teach them how to assess the pain. Instructors need to keep in mind that many people may have little body awareness prior to their martial arts training. What may be simple for the experienced instructor to assess may be beyond the novice martial artists capability. Therefore, part of early instruction can be explaining the particular pain signals when the student experiences them and helping him or her know when it is okay to ignore the signal. If the martial artist experiences an injury identified as temporary and has attended to the necessary physical recovery assessment and treatment, he or she then needs to focus on mental recovery. Too often, negative thoughts intrude such as "This is really going to hurt my training schedule. There's no way I can win now" or "It's going to take so much effort to regain my level of ability. Is it worth it?" The martial artist can easily become depressed even if the injury only sidelines him or her for a few months. However, depression can have serious consequences. It can impact the length of time that it takes to physically recover both because the athlete doesn't take proper physical care of him or herself as well as the chemical imbalance created by depression slows the healing process.Thus, it is important for the martial artist to stay in control of the thought process. He or she can do this by choosing to view the recovery time as an opportunity to practice the mental game which often doesn't get enough attention anyway. Some of these skills I have discussed in previous articles. The martial artist can develop relaxation skills by practicing breathing and meditation. He or she can develop focus by practicing moves imaginally and even imagining sparring scenarios. Errors in performance can be corrected by mentally rehearsing the desired behavior. During this time the martial artist can set mental goals to be achieved. Not only do these exercises help keep the athlete motivated and positively focused, but they also aid in reducing physical recovery time. Of course the more difficult situation to manage is when an injury puts an end to martial arts practice. I've heard individuals state that if they couldn't continue practicing the martial arts, they would want to die. Although such an attitude is part of a normal grief reaction and the individual needs to mourn the loss of such an important part of their life, each martial artist needs to be prepared for this possibility. Initially, the martial artist needs to allow the normal emotions of grief to occur (see Issues in Ending a Sports Career for further explanation). However, with proper preparation, he or she can begin to focus on other activities and life experiences to replace what they have lost. The individual needs to recognize that the martial arts and/or physical activities aren't the only source of satisfaction, competence, and excitement in life. Sometimes, as we come to an acceptance of the loss we can open ourselves up to the opportunity that is presented and experience new aspects of life. In fact, what is unique to the martial arts versus other sports is that the martial arts have emphasized a philosophy of life that can continue to be pursued even if the physical aspects of the arts cannot. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Free Relaxation Audios for Children Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Bouncing Ball Mindfulness Magic Book Relaxation Magic Forest Magic Bubbles Cloud Castles Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Bouncing Ball Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magic Book Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magic Book Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magic Forest If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magic Forest If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magic Bubbles If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Magic Bubbles If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Cloud Castles If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness This relaxation for children (and the young at heart) describes experiencing a gigantic colorful sandbox. It teaches children to be mindful of the sights and sounds of their experience. Mindfulness is often natural for children and this audio helps to enhance their ability to focus in a mindful way. About 15 minutes. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This audio may be used for sleep. Just allow yourself to gently drift off. You may awaken whenever you are ready. Relaxation at bedtime allows for a more restful sleep. Do not use while operating a car! With Great Thanks to My special 7-year-old twitter friend, Darwin @darwinkochis (name used with permission) came up with the idea for this audio and helped by reviewing the script as I developed it. Listen With Music Bouncing Ball Mindfulness This relaxation for children (and the young at heart) describes following a bouncing ball on an adventure. It teaches children to be mindful of the sights and sounds of their experience. Mindfulness is often natural for children and this audio helps to enhance their ability to focus in a mindful way. It also teaches slow breathing and helps with relaxation. About 12 minutes. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This audio may be used for sleep. Just allow yourself to gently drift off. You may awaken whenever you are ready. Relaxation at bedtime allows for a more restful sleep. Do not use while operating a car! Listen Magic Book Relaxation This relaxation for children (and the young at heart) describes finding a magic book that creates pleasant images from your mind. It guides you through discovering a special place and teaches mindful imagery and relaxation. About 19 minutes. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This audio may be used for sleep. Just allow yourself to gently drift off. You may awaken whenever you are ready. Relaxation at bedtime allows for a more restful sleep. Do not use while operating a car! Listen With Music Magic Forest This relaxation for children (and the young at heart) focuses on a trip through a magical forest and meeting the different animal guides during the adventure. Assists with sleep. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a car! Listen With Music Magic Bubbles Audio relaxation exercise for children (and the young at heart) which transports the child to a colorful, imaginative place in which to delight. It uses imagining blowing bubbles as a way to slow the breathing. Great for relaxing at bedtime to create a gentle, pleasant sleep! Once the child has listened to this a few times, s/he may be able to use the blowing bubbles technique at other times to help calm him or herself. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a car! Listen With Music Cloud Castles Audio relaxation exercise for children (and the young at heart) which tells the story of an adventure riding in a hot air balloon. It describes seeing the forest friends and visiting the cloud castles in the sky. Great for helping children to relax and sleep at night. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Do not use while operating a car! Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Spheres of Control Scale The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses the degree of control that you feel you have in three major areas of life: personal achievement, interpersonal relationships, and political institutions. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control Uncertainty, Decision-making, and Stress An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? The Value of Each and Every Life and How Perfectionism Destroys that Value Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? More questionnaires: List of PsychTests Your Happiness Assessment Cognitive Styles Test Self-Esteem Self-Efficacy How Social Are You? For authors and more information: Paulhus, D.L., & Van Selst, M. (1990). The Spheres of Control scale: Ten years of research. Personality and Individual Differences, 11, 1029-1036. Spittal, M.J., Siegert, R.J., McClure, J.L., & Walkey, F.H. (2002). The Spheres of Control scale: the identification of a clear, replicable three-factor structure. Personality and Individual Differences, 32, 121-131. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles APPEARANCE REJECTION SENSITIVITY QUESTIONNAIRE The following questionnaire is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. As with many research questionnaires, this questionnaire may not be normed for online participants. Please take this into account when you receive the results. This questionnaire determines how sensitive you are to rejection due to your appearance. Each of the items below describes different scenarios that people might find themselves in. Please imagine yourself in each situation and circle the number that best indicates how you would feel. No login required to obtain results. Situation 1: You are leaving your house to go on a first date when you notice a blemish on your face. How concerned or anxious would you be that your date might be less attracted to you because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that the person would find me less attractive. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 2: You are trying on clothes at a department store and notice that you are a few pounds heavier than last week. How concerned or anxious would you be that others might be less attracted to you because of your physical appearance? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that others would find me less attractive. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 3: You are at a party and are shorter than everyone there. How concerned or anxious would you be that others would not be attracted to you because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that others would not be attracted to me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 4: You post a photo of yourself on an internet dating service. How concerned or anxious would you be that people might not contact you because of the way you looked? (how physically attractive/unattractive you looked). Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would not expect people to contact me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 5: Your new boyfriend/girlfriend bought you a gym membership for your birthday. How concerned or anxious would you be that you were bought this gift because of the way your body looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that my significant other had given me this gift because of the way my body looked Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 6:During dinner at a restaurant, you notice your date looking at an attractive person across the room. How concerned or anxious would you be that your date would be less interested in you because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that my date would be less interested in me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 7: You are waiting in line at a club and others in line behind you are being let in before you. How concerned or anxious would you be that you were not let in because of your physical appearance? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would not expect to be let into the club because of my physical appearance. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 8: You met someone at a coffee shop and gave them your phone number. Three days have passed and you still have not heard anything. How concerned or anxious would you be that they did not call you because of your physical appearance? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that he/she would not call me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 9: Your boyfriend/girlfriend of 3 months is considering breaking up with you. How concerned or anxious would you be that he/she might end the relationship because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that my boyfriend/girlfriend would break up with me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 10: You are at a dance club and all of your friends have been asked to dance except for you. How concerned or anxious would you be that no one wanted to dance with you because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that no one would want to dance with me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 11: You are set up on a blind date. The date goes well and you like the person, but he/she has not called you for several days. How concerned or anxious would you be that your date did not call you because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that my date would not call me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 12: You are taking dance lessons that involve dancing with partners. When the instructor tells everyone to find a partner, no one chooses you. How concerned or anxious would you be that you were not chosen to dance because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect to not be chosen to dance because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 13: Your significant other makes a comment about your weight. How concerned or anxious would you be that your significant other might be less attracted to you because of the way you looked? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect my significant other to be less attracted to me because of the way I looked. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 14:Your hair is looking thin lately. How concerned or anxious would you be that others might be less attracted to you because of your physical appearance? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that others would find me less attractive. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. Situation 15:You look at yourself in the mirror and notice that your gut is getting larger. How concerned or anxious would you be that others might be less attracted to you because of your physical appearance? Extremely unconcerned. Very unconcerned. Unconcerned. Concerned. Very concerned. Extremely concerned. I would expect that others would find me less attractive. Extremely unlikely. Very unlikely. Unlikely. Likely. Very likely. Extremely likely. No login required to obtain results. Your score is for personal information only. It is not meant as a professional evaluation. Information regarding the Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire can be found at: Downey G. & Feldman, S. (1996). Implications of Rejection Sensitivity for Intimate Relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1327-1343. Feldman, S. & Downey, G. (1994). Rejection sensitivity as a mediator of the impact of childhood exposure to family violence on adult attachment behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 231-247. RECOMMENDED BOOKS... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Jealousy Assistance If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Jealousy Assistance Audio that helps you cope with an episode of jealousy. When you are caught up in the obsessive jealous thinking it is difficult to talk yourself out of it. This audio helps you challenge the jealous thinking and to remind you that the jealous behaviors only make the situation worse. The more you listen to it, the more you will be able to challenge the irrational jealous talk yourself. NOTE: This audio is to help those with irrational jealousy. It is not for rational jealousy (when an event has actually occurred) nor is it for psychotic jealousy (when a person can't distinguish reality). TRANSCRIPT Listen Transcript: Jealousy Assistance You are listening to this because you are feeling overwhelming jealousy that is making you want to act in ways that may be hurtful to yourself or your relationship. You may feel like you are going to lose control or make a fool of yourself. But stop! Listen to me! YOU CAN GET THROUGH THIS. THIS IS AN EMOTIONIT DOES NOT CONTROL YOUR BEHAVIOR. YOU DON'T HAVE TO ALLOW IT TO CONTROL YOU. You are listening to this because you are experiencing irrational jealousy that is affecting your relationship. Irrational jealousy is when you feel jealous and act based on that feeling but you don't have any evidence. In fact, your rational, logical self tells you that there is no reason to feel jealous, but you still do. However, you have taken the first step to learning to deal with this problem. You are recognizing that your jealousy is a problem and that you need to change. You need to recognize that jealousy is a fear. It can be a fear of inadequacy or a fear of loss or a fear of feeling bad or a fear of being hurt or a fear of being vulnerable. But it is a fear. And fears feel bad but they don't have to control your life. Learning to understand your fear and where it came from can help you learn to control it. When you have irrational jealousy the fear is so overwhelming that you come to believe, "There must be some reason I am feeling this way." So, you tend to believe the emotion without evaluating it. We call this emotional reasoning which is believing that just because you feel something, it must be true. Certainly, our emotions are important information but they are not always accurate. We need to look at the emotion and determine where it is coming from and why we are feeling it. What is the evidence for this emotion? To some extent you have already done this because you are recognizing that the jealousy is a problem. However, you may or may not recognize that the emotion itself is a problem. Most people are first able to recognize the behavior that is caused by the emotion and how hurtful it is. They understand that their jealous behavior creates problems in their relationship. However, it is important to understand the emotion. These feelings you are experiencing right now will go away. They'll go away on their own. With time. You can be assured of that. They have to go away because they are a part of the normal way that the body reacts. We feel emotions but we don't have to act on them. The reason it seems that the emotion can last forever is because you keep generating it by dwelling on it and in engaging in the jealous behaviors such as questioning, accusations, or getting reassurance. This keeps you engaged in the emotion. If you learn to tolerate the emotion without having to pursue it, it can only last a short time. The emotional discomfort will pass. You want to try to get rid of the uncomfortable emotions by getting reassurance that everything is okay. But you know from past experience that this has not worked. Jealousy is an emotion. It may be uncomfortable but you don't have to get rid of the feeling. By learning to tolerate the emotion you can learn that you don't have to engage in the jealous behavior. And that is the most important part of dealing with jealousy because the behavior is so hurtful. It harms your relationship and you don't want to do it anymore. By learning to tolerate the unpleasant sensation of jealousy you can learn that you don't have to desperately try to get rid of it. You can learn to let it pass over you without having to act on it. Slow down and just ask yourself, "What is really happening?" Notice the sensations in your body. These feelings cannot control you. They are a normal part of how the body operates. You may feel a variety of sensations such as nervousness or agitation with your heart beating faster, you may feel hot or shaky, you may feel muscle tension such as a tightness in your chest, you may experience stomach upset. These are all part of the emotion you feel. Emotions can only last a short while and if you learn to tolerate the emotion it will have less a grip on you. These feelings may be uncomfortable and unsettling but that's all they are. Remember that acting on the basis of emotion without evaluating it is emotional reasoning. You are listening to this because you know that you have no evidence for this emotion. You know that your behavior is harming your relationship. And you want to stop! You can control this behavior. Now stop and continue to listen. Take a slow breath. It may be a little difficult at first but as you continue to listen to me you can continue to slow down your breathing. Inhale slowly and exhale slowly. As you exhale let the muscles in shoulders relax, let your shoulders drop and relax. Soon you will begin to feel better. Don't try to force it. Just continue to listen to me. This feeling of jealousy will pass. It has to. That's the way the body functions. Whatever you are feeling right now will pass. We cannot feel intense emotions forever. However, for right now just remember that what you are feeling may be intense, but you don't have to try to get rid of it. Your attempts to get rid of this emotion just makes it worse. You reinforce this emotion by dwelling on it and trying to feel better by getting reassurance. The way to stop the grip this emotion has on you is to learn to tolerate it and to recognize that it is not based on any current evidence. Continue to take slow breaths. Inhale slowly. And exhale slowly. Continue to listen to what I am saying. Now let the muscles in your neck and your shoulders relax. Let your shoulders and your arms drop and relax as you breathe slowly. You know that this emotion and the scary thoughts have controlled your life. They tell you what you can do and what you can't do. It is unfair that they have controlled you like this and dictated what you can do in your life. You must be so tired of this problem. You don't want to be controlled and intimidated by this fear anymore! You are fed up with feeling like this but you don't have to get rid of the emotion by hurtful behavior. Right now you are doing something about it. Right now you are listening to me. Right now you are fighting back by learning to tolerate these uncomfortable feelings. And you can do this. You can get through this. It may be unpleasant but you can do this. Because I know, and you will to, that you will be okay. You can do what you set out to do. Yes, you can! Because nothing more than what you are experiencing right now will happen to you. The painful fear that you are experiencing right now will pass. You will begin to feel better. This is an emotion. It is a normal way that the body functions. You can get through this without hurting your relationship. Now again, take a slow breath. Inhale slowly, and exhale very slowly. Let your entire upper body relax and loosen as you inhale. Do not worry if you start to become more aware of your tension as you try to relax. It will pass. You will become better and better at letting the tension go. But to do that you may need to become more aware of it which will be uncomfortable at first. Remember, it will pass. Now pay attention to what is happening right now. Try to focus outside of yourself. Where are you? What do you see around you? Take a good look and notice the things that you see. What are you doing? What is happening? Slow down and pay attention to what is really happening right now. No matter how much you might believe that something terrible is going to happen or has happened, nothing is really happening right now. You are just feeling sensations in your body. These are normal part of the way the body works. Nothing terrible is happening right now. You are just feeling uncomfortable emotions. This discomfort will pass if you just give it time. You are choosing something difficult right now. You are choosing to fight back. You are fighting back by learning to tolerate these uncomfortable sensations and to not let them control your life. You are choosing to challenge this problem by doing what you have set out to do. By continuing to do what you want instead of letting the jealous emotions dictate to you what you can and cannot do. You are choosing to tolerate this emotion now so that it won't control you tomorrow. You know that you may feel uncomfortable now but that it will be gone. You know that the more you learn to tolerate these unpleasant sensations, the less they will control you. You are choosing to face this discomfort so that you can live a better life tomorrow. This may hurt now but you will be alright. These are just feelings that have no evidence. You are engaging in emotional reasoning, believing that just because you feel something it must be true. But its not! Feelings aren't reality. We need to evaluate feelings to determine if they are accurate. You are listening to this because you know your feelings are not accurate but you can't stop feeling this way. Continue to listen to me. Take a slow breath. Inhale slowly. Exhale slowly. Don't try to force the breathing or relaxation. Just continue to breath and it will slow down. Allow the muscles in your upper body to relax. The muscles in your neck and shoulders and chest and arms. Let them become smooth and relaxed. Your body will continue to loosen up and relax on its own as you continue to listen to me. As time passes it will naturally relax. Just let it do what it knows how to do. Now just continue to listen to my voice. As you do, let all other thoughts go. Just listen carefully to what I am saying. Focus on me and let the other thoughts go. This jealousy has a grip on you because you dwell on the thoughts but these are only thoughts. They cannot control you and you can learn to let them go. However, it is not straight-forward. The more we try to not think of a thought, the more the thought is present. Even telling ourselves not to think something is thinking it. So that way doesn't work. To let go of a thought we need to let it be but not give it attention. The thought may be there in the back of your head but you can choose to focus on something else. For instance, right now you may be choosing to listen to me. We can learn to not dwell on thoughts by choosing how we want to focus our attention. You can focus your attention on calming your body. Jealousy is an emotion that feeds on tension. The more tense and agitated you are, the more you keep the jealousy present. As you relax your body, the emotion will begin to decrease. To experience an emotion we need both the thought and the physical sensations of the emotion. Without one or the other, it is difficult to maintain the emotion. The more you relax the harder it is to feel the intense emotion. Now again take a slow breath. Focus on your breath. Inhale slowly. And exhale. Let the muscles in your body loosen and relax. Let the muscles in your forehead smooth out and relax. Let the muscles in your neck, the sides, the back the front of your neck smooth out and relax. Let your shoulders and arms droop and relax. Just breathe slowly and let your body do what it knows how to do. As you calm your body, the emotion and the fear will begin to decrease. Emotions need the physical tension to control you. As you relax you gain more and more control. I know it can be very tempting to give up. It is tiring to have to feel this way. It is easier to give into the urge to engage in the jealous behavior, the accusations, the questions, the demands. But that doesn't work. You know that. It takes a lot of courage to learn how to tolerate these feelings, to face this down, to tell it "I'm not going to let you control my life anymore!" rather than to give into the behavior. You are facing this problem right now. You are challenging yourself to face this fear and I know what kind of courage that takes. Many people never have to face their fears because their fears don't directly affect their lives. Or they use alcohol or drugs to not have to feel. But you have the courage to face these fears down. You know that the more that you face them, they will lose their control over you. And as it loses its control it will begin to go away. You don't need to let this problem control your life any longer. You have the courage to face it. You don't need to let the fears decide what you are able to do in your life are how you will act. You can decide. You are learning to tolerate these sensations so that you can have a better life in the long run. Just continue to breathe and relax. If you need to listen to this again, that is perfectly okay. Eventually you can learn to tolerate these unpleasant emotions so they don't control your behavior. You are making the choice to listen to this rather than hurting your relationship. If you listen to this whenever you feel the urge to engage in the jealous behavior, you will become better at controlling your impulses. Copyright 2010 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. and www.excelatlife.com Permission to reprint this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles happiness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Choosing Happiness This audio teaches you about the obstacles to happiness. The more you learn about what gets in the way of creating the conditions for happiness in your life, you can begin to make changes. Although this audio can be used for educational purposes, it is meant to be listened to repeatedly to help change some of the thinking that creates obstacles to happiness. The more you listen to it, the more likely you are to begin incorporating the methods into your daily life. As you listen to it you will begin to make plans about what you need to do to change your life. This audio is best when listening to it in a relaxed state. However, it is not deep relaxation and can be listened to while doing other things. TRANSCRIPT Listen Transcript: Choosing Happiness This audio is to help you address obstacles to your happiness. Many of the obstacles to happiness that people experience are due to how people think about happiness and what creates happiness. By understanding happiness and your thinking about it, you will be better able to create the conditions for happiness. It is important first to recognize what happiness is NOT. Many people equate happiness with having what they want in life whether that is money, a love relationship, a satisfying career, many friends, removal of suffering or whatever else people can desire. But happiness doesn't come from having what you want. If it did there would probably be few happy people because life doesn't conform to expectations. Demanding life be what you want is likely to make you less happy. This includes demanding that you should have a happy life. Such a demand will lead to unhappiness because nothing can ever measure up to the demand. However, when you let go of demands you can develop the conditions for happiness. The first step to developing the conditions for happiness is to let go of the NEED to be happy. In other words, you can desire to be happy and you can strive for happiness, but to find happiness, you must not seek it! I know that may not make sense to some, but it is the truth. The harder you try to find happiness, the more elusive it becomes. As Nathaniel Hawthorne said, Happiness is a butterfly, which when pursued, is always just beyond your grasp, but which, if you will sit down quietly, may alight upon you. So the key to happiness is to learn how to develop the conditions so that happiness can find you instead of pursuing it. It may be difficult to believe that you don't NEED to be happy. But the more that you believe that you can be okay even if you aren't happy, the less demand you are placing on life. Now, this doesn't mean you don't care about anything. You can still strive towards meaningful goals but you don't pursue those goals with the purpose of achieving happiness. Instead, you are developing a mindful attitude of living. Developing a mindful approach towards life allows you to fully experience and appreciate all that life offers, not just what YOU want it to be. A mindful approach means focusing on the present instead of waiting for a future that may never come or dwelling on the past. With a mindful approach to life, you are less likely to miss the opportunities that life has in store for you. Sometimes people become so focused on their demands for life, that they don't see what life can be. Don't let this happen to you! Let yourself be present to experience life rather than try to force life into some image you have created. You may be surprised at what life can show you. Happiness IS a choice. It is a choice that you make every day. But it is a choice about how you will LIVE your life. It is NOT just about being in a positive mood. It is about choosing your attitude towards life so that you focus on what truly creates contentment and satisfaction. Demand does not create these feelings. Some people are afraid to let go of demand because they believe these demands drive them to achieve and without them they will do nothing. However, the reality is that truly happy people achieve much. But what they achieve may not always be tangible to others. What people do to create the conditions of happiness and what they achieve is unique to each person. Happy people usually have a sense of purpose. They focus on something that provides meaning to them. Often, although not always, the sense of purpose provides service to others as well. The more you focus your life on creating meaning for yourself, on pursuing your passion, on YOUR sense of purpose, the more you create the conditions for happiness. Recognize, too, that even painful experiences of life can present you with opportunities if you can allow yourself to fully experience and learn from them. Happiness means that you have the full range of your emotions, not just positive ones. Emotions are part of the information we obtain from the world around us. If we don't experience and listen to our emotions, we are approaching life with limited information. Our intellect is important, too, but we need all the information we can obtain. Therefore, don't avoid or diminish your emotions just because they might not feel good. This doesn't mean that you should act based on emotions but USE the information from the emotions to help with an intellectual assessment. If you learn to fully pay attention to this information from your emotions, you will make better decisions and create the conditions for happiness in your life. Because happy people use emotions with a purpose. They don't avoid them because they are uncomfortable. But they also don't dwell on them needlessly. So, learn to use your emotions purposefully. If you are angry, recognizing your anger and the cause helps you to develop a solution to the problem. If you are sad, allowing yourself to grieve helps you find resolution. If you are anxious, knowing the cause helps you assess the situation and develop a plan. Happy people are problem-solvers. They believe that their efforts will make a difference. And because they believe that they are more likely to make an effort, they try and find a solution. And because they try, they have a higher likelihood of finding a solution. So although they have the same life circumstances and random negative events as others, they create more positive experiences in their lives because of this attitude. The more you believe in possibilities in your life, the more likely you will find those possibilities. Don't listen to discouragement from others. Believe in yourself and pursue opportunities. The more you actively problem-solve and develop goals and believe in your ability to attain these goals, the more likely you will. But more than that, you create the conditions for happiness. Happy people tend to affiliate with others. Generally, they are trusting of others but because they have access to their emotions they can evaluate when to give trust. They don't focus on what others can do for them but they focus on what they can do for others. A happy person wants others to be happy, too. They have compassion for others and are able to recognize that people don't have to be perfect to have valuethat each person, no matter the flaws, has value. Focus on developing an attitude of loving kindness and compassion towards others. Such an attitude reaps immense rewards. The more you focus on creating happiness for others, the more you receive in return. However, you can't give to others to get the rewards. Giving needs to be without any expectation in return. As I said earlier, any demand, expectation, is only likely to lead to disappointment. Happiness is not competitive although a happy person may compete. When a happy person competes, they want their competitors to be at their best. They see competition as a way for everyone to become better, not as a way of feeling superior to someone else. In fact, they take failure in stride as a way to learn, not as something to feel bad about. They enjoy competing against people who are better than them because of this opportunity to learn. Focus on being your best at whatever you do, but don't focus on outcome. Evaluate yourself based on how you strive, not on what you achieve. Outcome is momentary. It may be nice to experience that joy of success, but it will not provide happiness. Focusing on the PROCESS of striving, of trying, leads to longer-lasting contentment and satisfaction. Happy people don't focus on seeking the approval of others. Since they can be content with themselves as they are, they don't NEED others to tell them they are okay. And because they can accept themselves, they are more accepting of others, even their flaws. So, recognize that you can be content with yourself. You can still strive to improve yourself. But THAT is best achieved by focusing on the desire to improve rather than a demand. Demands are discouraging, not motivating. Another important condition for happiness is your health. The more you strive to take care of yourself physically, the more likely happiness will find you. Your body is like a machine. If you don't take care of it, it will break down and won't work efficiently. Learn to appreciate and love your body for what it is instead of what you think it should be. When you do so, you are more likely to take care of it. So much of health is related to controllable conditions. Focus on small changes to help you improve your health. Although your health may not be completely controllable, you can try to control what you are able. As you do, you will recognize that it feels good to take care of yourself. Whether you focus on your health or any other condition for happiness we've discussed, recognize that you don't need to change everything at once. In fact, attempting to change too much usually means that it is based on a demand, not a desire. Recognize that you can love yourself flaws and all. However, when you truly care about yourself, you are more likely to WANT to make changes to improve your life. You will WANT to make changes, but you can recognize that you don't NEED to. When you do make changes you can focus on small changes. A Chinese proverb states The man who moves a mountain begins by carry away small stones. A happy person focuses on those stones, not on the mountain. This audio is to help you change your thinking about happiness. You may understand what I just explained to you. However, true change comes from more than understanding it. Change comes from making it a constant part of your way of thinking. So, if this is new to you, it is best to listen to this audio repeatedly, even daily, until you begin to think this way routinely and incorporate it into your daily life. For now just take a slow breath deep into your lungs. As you exhale allow yourself to be aware of your present. Focus mindfully on today. Choose what you will do today to create the conditions for your happiness. You don't need to worry about tomorrow or whether you will be successful at this. Persistence, continuing to try, to strive, allows for success. Your happiness is dependent upon your attitude. Remember, to find happiness, you must not seek it! Be okay about not being happy. But allow yourself to pursue the conditions that contribute to happiness. Recognize that all your experiences in life and all your emotions, the pleasant and the uncomfortable ones are important. Be mindful and present rather than focused on the past or the future. Find a passion, something that gives your life meaning and pursue it. Give to others without expectation of return. Take care of your health. Love yourself as you are. Make small changes to create the conditions for happiness in your life. Doing these things, without demanding that happiness must be your reward, will likely increase your contentment and satisfaction in life. Copyright 2012 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2023 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: February 19, 2023 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles When You Have Been Betrayed If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download When You Have Been Betrayed by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "To be betrayed, the person must first experience trust in the betrayer... ...when they do hurt us, we then have the awareness that this other person has the capacity to hurt us." Read the following to: Understand how trust is a necessary requirement for someone to betray another. Learn how betrayal is a loss. Understand the process of grief to help resolve the loss caused by betrayal. Related articles by Dr. Frank: Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Forgiveness and the Process of Healing Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Estimated reading time: 13 minutes What is betrayal? Betrayal is one of the most devastating losses a person can experience. To be betrayed, the person must first experience trust in the betrayer. It is fairly impossible for you to be betrayed if you did not trust the individual in the first place or at least had an expectation of trust. Therefore,the definition of betrayal involves the act of someone violating your trust in them. This article discusses a variety of forms of betrayal. For instance, a child is betrayed when they are abused by the parents who are supposed to love, support, and protect the child. A spouse is betrayed when their partner has an affair. A friend is betrayed when a friend gossips about personally shared information. The examples of betrayal are limitless because betrayal occurs whenever you trust someone and they violate your trust either deliberately or carelessly. Betrayal is when someone you trust (or believe you should be able to trust) lies to you, cheats on you, abuses you, or hurts you by putting their own self-interest first. Betrayal as loss. Betrayal is probably the most devastating loss a person can experience. Notice that I am using the term "loss" to describe the consequences of betrayal. In our society, we have trouble understanding the concepts of loss and grief. We understand that when someone dies we experience loss and grief, but frequently we don't recognize the other forms of loss that we may experience in life. Loss can be losing a person through death. However, it can also be losing a part of that person such as through illness. When a spouse develops Alzheimer's, for instance, the healthy spouse may experience loss of companionship or loss of emotional support. To understand the loss caused by betrayal, it is necessary to recognize loss can also involve less tangible experiences such as trust. When an individual is betrayed by someone, they lose trust in that person. And, sometimes, more importantly, they may lose trust in a larger way such as not being able to trust people in general once they have been abused by an individual. When we choose to trust another person, we believe they won't hurt us. If they do hurt us, we then have the awareness that this other person has the capacity to cause us mental suffering. As a result, we have lost something very important to the relationship. Purposeful Aspect of Betrayal. The reason that betrayal is the most devastating kind loss is because most often it is a loss that didn't have to occur. It only occurs because of someone's deliberately hurtful behavior, or their carelessness, or their own personal weakness. Unlike a loss such as death or illness, there is usually some sort of choice involved. The person who was betrayed believes that the choice was wrong and preventable. Loss of the Illusion. Even more confusing, however, is that sometimes loss can be the loss of an illusion. Frequently, we develop in our minds the way we think things "should" be or the way we have been led to believe they are. However, reality doesn't always correspond with the demands that we put on life, ourselves, and others. Therefore, sometimes we are hurt when we have to face this reality. For instance, imagine children who grow up in the fortunate experience of having parents who always put the needs of their children first. But what they don't know is that their parents are unhappy together. Those children become young adults and are confronted with their parents telling them that they are getting a divorce. Frequently, those children feel betrayed by the illusion of the happy family they always thought they had. Suddenly they are confronted with a hurtful reality Another example is that a man marries a woman and thinks of her as a virtuous, moral person. Later he finds out that she had numerous sexual encounters prior to their relationship. He has lost his concept of how he thought of his wife. He feels betrayed even though she didn't do anything to break her committed to him; his sense of betrayal is the loss of the illusion of how he thought of his wife. However, even if the betrayal is the loss of the illusion, the grief is very real and needs to be dealt with. Sometimes this is hard to do because the person is told and believes they shouldn't feel so strongly about something that was not an actual betrayal of them. So with this type of loss a person is often tempted to move on too quickly without resolving it. Loss is personal. As you read some of the examples in this article, you might think "I wouldn't consider that betrayal" or "That's silly to be bothered by that." This makes the point that a sense of betrayal can vary from person to person. Every person is different and the pact they made or believe they made with another person, a group of people, or even a business can vary. The bottom line is they believe someone broke the trust they put in them and they are hurt. What is the process of grief? So, given that betrayal is a loss, it is necessary to understand the process of grief in order to deal with having been betrayed. Most often, when people have been betrayed, they have overwhelming emotions which are so intense they are unable to make sense of the emotions. Therefore, if you have been betrayed, you need to understand what these emotions are and why you are experiencing them before you can really take any action. The theory of grief is that it involves several stages. Frequently these stages may overlap, or one stage may be experienced more intensely than another, or another stage might be so shortly lived it didn't seem it was part of the grief experience. However, the most important part of this theory is that it is not possible to reach the final stage of acceptance without having moved through the prior stages. What should you expect with grief when you have been betrayed? 1) Denial/Shock. The first stage of shock or denial is when you are initially confronted with the betrayal. You may feel numb or feel like someone just punched you in the gut. There might be a tendency to disbelieve the betrayal. For instance, if you hear it from a third party, you might tend to ignore it or even get mad at them for making things up.The denial stage, however, is usually fairly short especially if the individual acknowledges the betrayal and the loss. It may be longer if someone has an issue with feeling anger. Then, they might want to try and dismiss the seriousness of the transgression or try to focus too quickly on forgiving the transgressor. 2) Anger. Once the betrayal and loss is fully acknowledged, the individual is likely to feel intense anger. This is a very delicate stage because this is when many things can go wrong in the process. Primarily, it is critical to recognize that the emotion of anger is perfectly okay, but our actions that are influenced by anger may not be okay.For many people, when they are first hurt and react with anger, their inclination is to retaliate, to hurt the person who hurt them. There is nothing wrong with feeling this way, but it is best to not react during this stage. It is better to work fully through the stages of grief and then decide how you are going to react. Even if it takes a number of months to work through the grief, it is better to wait than to regret rash actions.Now, this doesn't mean you have to be completely passive about your anger. In fact, it is okay to tell the person, "I am so angry right now that I can't think straight. Before I do anything I will regret later, I need some space to process this." 3) Sadness. As you work through the anger, you should begin to come to a point of sadness. The sadness is experienced when you begin to recognize the full extent of what you have lost. You begin to think about the good things in the relationship that you miss. You think about the shattered trust and knowing you can never get complete trust back. Once someone has violated our trust, we can get to a point where we can continue the relationship with them (if we choose), but we will forever know they have the capacity to betray us. 4) Acceptance. The grief process is a healing process. It was built into our systems to help us cope with the numerous losses we experience in life. If we trust the process fully, we will heal. Trusting the process means allowing the feelings to be what they are, whatever they are. Feelings are never wrong or bad. What we do because of feelings can be wrong or bad, but that is a choice. The feelings themselves are not bad. Therefore, feelings won't hurt us. They help us in healing. If you trust this healing process, you will finally get to a point of acceptance. This is the point where decisions can be made and action can be taken. At this point you are able to think clearly about the situation and decide what is the best course of action to take.Of course, the action you take will vary depending on the person and the situation. You may decide that a continued relationship with this person can only lead to more hurt and is not worth the effort of trying to sustain a relationship. Or you may decide there are too many good things in the relationship to give it up. Becoming mired in the grief Sometimes people will get stuck in one of the early stages of grief which prevents them from moving on. It is even conceivable for someone to be stuck in one of these stages for years. The tragedy of betrayal can impact a person's life dramatically. Although every person betrayed experiences the short-term consequences of the act, the longer term consequences are usually due to being stuck in the grief process. Stuck in denial. Most commonly people want to avoid the experience of grief because the emotions are so intense. So they often engage in avoidance behaviors. Sometimes these behaviors can be compulsive, additive behaviors such as abusing drugs or alcohol, over-eating, or gambling. Such behaviors are attempted escapes from unpleasant emotions. People also escape emotions in other ways such as obsessive reassurance-seeking, questioning, or dependency. Or people might just avoid the situation altogether and write the other person out of their lives. These are only a few of the most common ways people avoid the grief process. Some times, people become stuck in the denial stage by becoming overly focused on forgiveness. They are so quick to want to resolve the issue they deny the full experience of the anger and sadness involved in the loss. Stuck in bargaining. Bargaining is an attempt to resolve the problem - to make it go away. For example, exacting unrealistic promises from someone to correct the behavior. Such as a woman who has been abused repeatedly by her husband and believes him when he says he won't do it again. The bargaining stage can be an aspect of the denial stage because bargaining is a type of denial which prevents the full experience of the emotions of loss. Stuck in anger. A common stage where people become stuck, especially with the issue of betrayal, is in the anger stage. They become so focused on the wrong done to them they never fully experience the other emotions such as the sadness due to the loss of the relationship. Being stuck in the anger stage can be a particularly dangerous time when someone has been betrayed. A person might focus on ways to hurt the other person. Or they might make bad decisions in their personal life because they are not thinking clearly. Sometimes a person might even turn the anger against themself and engage in self-harm or suicidal behavior. What can you do to resolve the grief? Venting emotions is important. During the times of anger and sadness, the betrayed person needs to vent. The tendency is to want to vent with the person who hurt you as a form of retribution or attempts to resolve the problem. However, venting to the transgressor is not an effective way of settling an issue. The transgressor is going to be dealing with his/her own issues and is most likely to respond defensively. Therefore, it is only likely to lead to escalating anger.You need to vent to someone who will listen and validate your anger without encouraging excessive anger. For example, you want someone who will say, "I can understand why you are angry" but not someone who says "He's really scum. You should throw him out." Therefore, it is often best to talk with a trusted but unbiased friend. If that's not possible, a minister or a therapist can help you through this process. Additionally, venting is necessary because if you don't vent your emotions, you are more likely to displace them. One common form of displacing the anger of grief is to feel generally irritable and angry causing you to be more likely to take your emotions out on people who haven't really done anything to you. Finally, with anger, recognize that it is okay and sometimes necessary to release the anger physically. However, it is not okay to physically violate someone else. Therefore, if you need a physical release find one such as hitting a punching bag or breaking old pickle jars (in a safe way so as not to get hurt). Write grief letters. Another way to vent is to write out your feelings. You can even write a letter to the person who hurt you. However, it's not typically a good idea to send these initial letters to the transgressor because it may not reflect the final outcome for you. A letter format is frequently helpful in working through the anger stage of grief because it feels as if you are talking to the person and able to vent without having to regret it later. This is also a good method for people who have trouble getting in touch with their anger. During the time of sadness, you need to release those emotions just as you needed to release the anger. Again, you can write how you feel. Or you can imagine telling the person the hurt you have experienced and the loss of the relationship that grieves you. And, of course, it is okay to cry. How to determine when to forgive a betrayal? Many people ask how to know whether or not to forgive and continue with the relationship. I can give you some of the questions to consider for this issue but I can't give the answers because each person needs to determine for him or herself what is right. Is the behavior a continuing behavior or does the person recognize the hurt they have caused and are trying to change the behavior? Does the individual want forgiveness? To want forgiveness the person has to see the behavior as wrong and to not intend to engage in it any further. Was the transgression out of justified anger and the person regretted acting so rashly? Did they learn from this behavior and are unlikely to do it again? How long have you know the person? Is this typical behavior or is it a single instance? Have you talked with the person and they have accepted responsibility? Was the behavior intentional or was it related to the loss of an illusion (as described above)? What makes this relationship worth the forgiveness? Do you need to forgive so as to move on in your life without the bitterness? However, understand forgiveness doesn't mean you have to continue the relationship. This article only touches on the surface of all the emotions involved with betrayal, grief, and loss. Hopefully, however, it will give you some ideas about putting it into perspective and working through the stages of grief in order to determine what you want to do regarding the betrayal. Copyright 2004 (Revised 2023) by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Questions and Comments All comments and questions require approval so you may not see your submission immediately. Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: February 19, 2023 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Relationships Articles Betrayal Communication General Irrational Jealousy Rejection Sensitivity General What to Do When Anger Hurts Those You Love Explains how anger is reinforced biologically and how the CBT methods can help change the process. Breaking Up is Hard to Do: Ending a Bad Relationship Discusses two common problems when ending bad relationships: returning repeatedly to the relationship and failure to learn from the mistake. Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Understanding the reasons for hurtful behavior can lead to greater resolution of problems in relationships. Co-dependency: An Issue of Control Defines co-dependency and the problems that can occur in this unhealthy relationship style. Betrayal Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Discusses the normal grief process and how it impacts forgiveness. When You Have Been Betrayed Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Communication What If You Considered Other Peoples' Views? Discusses the biases that interfere with listening and suggests methods for active listening. When Needs Come Into Conflict A common source of conflict is when people have opposing, but valid, needs. Crazy-makers: Passive-Aggressive People The passive-aggressive style of communication can cause considerable problems in relationships. 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-Aggressive People Describes practical and effective ways of handling passive-aggressive behavior. For Women Only: How to Have the Relationship of Your Dreams When women learn how to be more direct about their needs they can develop more satisfying relationships. Porcupine Effect: Rejection Sensitivity Introduction: The Parable of the Porcupines What is the "Porcupine Effect" and how can it impact your life? The Plight of the Prickly Porcupine Describes the "Porcupine Effect": how the distress of rejection can cause the perception of rejection which may result in being rejected. When Rejection is an Illusion Describes how perceived rejection can be wrong. Discusses the four desires for relationships and when those desires can lead to inaccurate feelings of rejection. Redefining Rejection Discusses ways to think of perceived rejection differently and how to think about actual rejection. Describes some methods to help change thinking about rejection. Desire for Love vs. Demand for Romantic Love Identifies how romanticized versions of love can lead to feelings of rejection and how to think differently about love relationships. Irrational Jealousy When is Jealousy Irrational? Describes how to identify irrational jealousy and how it impacts relationships. What to do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Describes the destructiveness of irrational jealousy and how make changes. What to do When Your Partner's Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Relationship Discusses how to respond to a partner's irrational jealousy. Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy, and Impact on Relationships Examines the fear of rejection, its relation to irrational jealousy, and how it negatively affects relationships. Jealousy: When the Damage is Done Discusses what to do when the irrational jealousy has already seriously harmed the relationship. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Self-Concept Articles 20 STEPS TO BETTER SELF-ESTEEM Provides the how-to steps to improving self-esteem. THE PILLARS OF THE SELF-CONCEPT: SELF-ESTEEM AND SELF-EFFICACY Discusses the different but similar concepts of self-esteem and self-efficacy. FEEDBACK, SELF-EFFICACY, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOTOR SKILLS How to teach to increase internal motivation for developing physical skills. GIVING WOMEN FEEDBACK TO INCREASE SELF-EFFICACY Improving self-efficacy increases internal motivation. MAKING MISTAKES TO ENHANCE SELF-ESTEEM AND IMPROVE PERFORMANCE Thinking of mistakes in a different way can lead to greater success. SELF-EFFICACY: THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN SPORTS Defines self-efficacy and how it impacts performance in sports. EXERCISE AND THE SELF-ESTEEM CYCLE Describes how self-esteem influences exercise tendencies and how exercise improves self-esteem. PsychNotes Don't Accept Criticism Without Evaluating the Source Does Loving Yourself Make You a Narcissist? The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Selfies: A Sign of Low Self-esteem? Think Again Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Empathy Requires a Strong Sense of Self Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem "Common Sense" Approach to Praise Can Worsen Self-esteem in Vulnerable Children Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Understanding the Act As If Concept for Anxiety Treatment by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Question: I've been reading your articles for some time and while I've made some progress in becoming less anxious, I still have trouble behaving the way I want to when I feel anxious. I think this is referred to as Act as if in CBT. I think the main reason or issue behind it is that I see emotions as a true reflection of myself, at least in that particular moment. My question is, would you mind making a comment on Act as if' without relating it to Fake it til you make it? Since being real towards myself is quite important to me, I personally can't stand Fake it til you make it approach.* 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Tweet Excellent question because it reflects how Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is commonly misunderstood when simplified versions of CBT become maxims such as Fake it til you make it. What is the difference between act 'as if' and fake it til you make it? First, let's review what acting as if means for learning to manage anxiety. This reader is referring to the 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety: Suggestion 39: Act As If One type of exposure is to act as if you did not have the anxiety. In other words, to do what you would do normally if the anxiety was not present. This type of exposure addresses the avoidant behavior and confronts the anxiety. If you have panic attacks while attending meetings, for instance, instead of avoiding the meeting or sitting close to the door you would attend and participate in the meeting in the same way that you would if you didn't have anxiety. In a sense, this is a mindful approach in that instead of focusing on the anxiety thoughts you focus on participating in the meeting. Although this method can be helpful in low level anxiety situations, it may not be very effective when the anxiety is particularly high. However, it can be combined in a step-by-step fashion similar to the systematic desensitization in which you practice it in easier situations and then gradually try it in more and more difficult situations. In a sense, act as if is similar to fake it til you make it but only in the way that clinical depression is similar to sadness (see my article Depression is Not Sadness). When we explore the underlying meaning, though, it becomes a completely different concept. Unfortunately, these concepts are often used interchangeably, certainly by the public but even by professionals. My belief, as a rigorously trained CBT therapist, is that words matter. The way something is said can affect the acceptability of the concept, and therefore, the effectiveness of concept. So the confusion between act 'as if' and fake it may lie in the words used and their context. If you examine how fake it is generally used by people on the internet it usually coincides with pretend as in if you feel incompetent, pretend you are competent and confident and you will become confident. This is all to say that I think the fake it concept has gotten distorted from the original meaning in which it probably referred to the act 'as if'. How this came about is due to the need to simplify complex theory into easy-to-use maxims to guide people. George Kelly, a psychologist and one of the early leaders of cognitive therapy, suggested in the 1950s that people are naive scientists who create their own view of the world based upon their experiences. What this means: 1) The scientific method. A naive scientist has the desire to describe, predict, and control their personal life just as the scientific method is used to understand the world around us. Unfortunately, though, a principles that required in science to determine causality are not available to the individual: random assignment and/or rigorous scientific analysis. In other words, you can not take two (or more) versions of yourself and give them different experiences to find out which experience may have a better outcome. 2) Making assumptions. This naive scientist, then, is making assumptions based on very limited information related to him or herself. So when a person makes an assumption such as that moment was pivotal in my life or if I had acted differently, the outcome would have been better they are only guessing that their life is better or worse than it would have been if not for a certain event. The difference between a naive scientist and a scientist (as many psychologists are trained), then, is that a scientist bases assumptions on evidence from scientific experiments and/or statistical analysis that control for other possible explanations. Therefore, the value of a psychologist is not just an outside, unbiased observer, but also as a person who makes more informed assumptions based on evidence. Such an approach doesn't assure 100% accuracy but it increases the likelihood of the assumption being accurate and effective when used in treatment. 3) Constructing beliefs. According to Kelly (and cognitive theory) is that we then construct our beliefs based on this naive scientific approach. We create an explanation of ourselves and the world around us. However, that explanation can frequently be inaccurate because we don't take into account the things that didn't happen. I wouldn't have been hit by that car if I had taken the bus may be true but we don't know if something worse may have happened. So, I think the fake if til you make it maxim is the naive scientist's (the public's) attempt to use the scientific CBT principle of act 'as if'. Unfortunately, it becomes over-simplified in this process so that people may be more likely to fail in their attempts to use the concept or it might create a negative reaction to the concept because it seems inauthentic (as the reader indicates). What, then, does act 'as if' mean? Let's examine the components of this concept so that we can better understand how it can be used: 1) Difference between anxiety and an emotion. It is critical to understand that anxiety, especially clinical anxiety, does not always reflect emotion. This is a common error that many people, including health professionals, make. Sometimes anxiety is a learned response that is automatically triggered by a situation. And sometimes anxiety is present because a person is predisposed to having a higher level of anxiety. Or sometimes it is due to other factors that can affect the autonomic nervous system such as (but not limited to) lack of sleep, drugs, or illness. But human nature is to try and explain everything, so if a person has a panic attack in a certain circumstance they are likely to believe it was the situation that caused it instead of they were just more susceptible to having a panic attack for some reason. Trying to explain anxiety as an emotional reaction is also an attempt to control. If a person believes that something caused the anxiety, then they believe they can control the anxiety by avoiding that situation. In some circumstances, though, anxiety can reflect emotion. For instance, a person may be applying for a job and feels nervous about the interview. In this case, the arousal of the autonomic nervous which causes adrenalin to flow which, in turn, increases the symptoms is caused by the emotion of being afraid. However, notice that anxiety is not the emotion itself but the outcome of the emotion, in this case being concerned about the interview. Also, emotions can be triggered by the anxiety. For instance, when a person becomes fearful of having a panic attack in public and being embarrassed. In this case, the emotion is the fear of embarrassment. So, what all this means, is think of the anxiety as a set of symptoms caused by the arousal of the autonomic nervous system. However, that arousal may be due to emotions or it may be due to other causes. But the arousal itself is not an emotion. 2) Act as if is an exposure. If you read the 50 Tools of Panic and Anxiety you will see that the tools are divided into categories of relaxation/mindfulness, cognitive training, and exposure (behavioral) methods. Although there is overlap with cognitive training, the act 'as if' method is primarily an exposure method of treatment. What this means is that when anxiety is a learned response, exposure to situations helps you learn a different response. Acting as if puts the person in the situation while creating a different response to the situation. However, and this is very important as to the difference with the fake it concept, it doesn't mean you don't have anxiety, it means you engage in the desired behavior anyway. So the different response refers to the behavior, not the anxiety. For example, when I was younger I was terrified of public speaking but I forced myself to choose that option whenever possible: if a college class gave the choice of giving a talk or writing a paper, I chose giving the talk. In this situation, act 'as if' meant giving the talk without the focus on the anxious thoughts and instead focusing on the talk and my audience. It did not mean that I no longer had anxiety but with exposure to public speaking my anxiety was reduced. In addition, cognitive changes occurred so that I interpreted my anxiety as wanting to do well. In other words, if a particular talk created more anticipatory anxiety, it just meant that it might be more important to me and I needed to prepare more. 3) Mindful approach. As I indicate in the above description of act 'as if' it is a mindful approach. What that means is that you don't ignore what you are feeling especially if the anxiety is triggered by emotions, but instead, you accept what you are feeling as being there. At the same time, you can recognize that the anxiety and/or the emotions don't have to be acted upon. It may be helpful to review my series of articles/audios on Understanding Mindfulness especially the concept of developing a tolerance of emotions. By mindfully being aware of anxiety but not acting upon it, anxiety becomes more of what it is supposed to be rather than controlling your life. Normal anxiety is supposed to be a message to let us know about situations so that we can examine the underlying emotions or situations that might have triggered the anxiety. In this way we can determine what to do whether that is dealing with emotions of being threatened or just accepting that we don't feel good because of poor sleep or illness. 4) Normal behavior, not extraordinary behavior. Notice when I describe act 'as if' I state: to do what you would do normally if the anxiety was not present. The fake it concept has often been used (especially in the personal growth movement) with developing a pretense that you are better than what you are. If you pretend long enough that you are great at persuading people, you will be. This is not necessarily true because people have different talents and you can't become something you're not. Yet, people often create self-fulfilling beliefs that they are not capable of something when they are. So the true meaning of fake it til you make it, in my estimation, is very similar to act 'as if' in that it has to do with not letting the anxiety get in the way of who you truly are. So many of my clients at the end of therapy have said something to the effect of I was afraid that therapy would change me but what I found instead is that therapy helped me be who I really am. So neither of these concepts are meant to create an extraordinary version of yourself but to allow you to fully explore your capabilities without the negative beliefs interfering. 5) Normal anxiety vs. an anxiety disorder. Although this method can help those with anxiety disorders, as I indicate in my original description, it is not likely to be effective for debilitating anxiety especially early in treatment. It is most well-known for helping people manage the normal anxieties of life. What I mean by normal anxiety is anxiety that is not excessive to the situation but is a message about dangers that could occur under certain circumstances. However, once people with anxiety disorders have reduced the anxiety using other methods to a more manageable level this method can help with reducing avoidant behavior patterns. How to use the act 'as if' method Confusion about this method is that sometimes people are sent into situations with only the instruction to act as if without any further training. However, there are several steps to this method that I didn't clearly describe in 50 Tools: 1) Determine the behavior. This is probably best as a written exercise as people are more clear when they write something down rather than just thinking it. So, write in detail the specific behavior that you want to engage in. Be careful here to not focus on the feelings or thoughtinstead, just focus on the behavior. 2) Simple steps. Break the desired behavior down in simple steps. For instance, if you are afraid of public speaking, don't start with giving a talk in front of a large group. Instead, start by asking a question in a small group. Then, you can move on to gradually more and more difficult situations. 3) Practice. Whatever the desired behavior is, don't just expect yourself to be able to do it. Instead, practice the behavior. You can do this either with actual practice such as giving a talk in front of a mirror or imaginal practice such as imagining yourself engaging in the behavior. Whichever you choose, be sure you know how to engage in the behavior. Don't expect yourself to just be confident. Instead, determine what confident behaviors look like and then practice those behaviors (making eye contact, smiling, etc.). A note about the 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety Finally, keep in mind that the 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety are meant to select the best tools for each individual. In other words, not every tool works for every person. In fact, David Burns in his book When Panic Attacks says to quickly fail at using a method so as to be able to move on to one that will work. He suggests selecting the ones that seem they will be most helpful. Obviously, quickly fail has different meanings depending on the tool that is used because some of them take longer to master or implement than others. But the point is to not to worry about failure but to focus on finding the tools that will help. * By the way, I love questions because it allows me to discover where I may need to expand on these concepts. Copyright 2017 by Excel At Life, LLC Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles This site provides a number of resources to help you cope with depression. Although there is no "one size fits all" when treating depression, following this guide can help with your journey to managing depression. For mild depression, you may be able to use these resources as self-help. For more severe depression, a therapist can help you develop a plan and utilize the resources that fit best for your situation. Resources Screening Test Audios Articles Cognitive Diary Training Examples App: Depression CBT Self-Help Guide I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where Do I Start? 1) Break goals down into smaller steps. Sometimes it is difficult for those with depression to take small steps because they believe that such steps are too insignificant and won't make a difference. However, most of the things people accomplish are based on small steps or goals. 2) Do something that takes little effort. The tasks of CBT require effort. However, usually some method can be found for each individual that is manageable. 3) Do something. Anything. Depression wins when you lose all interest in normal activities, and for some people, life itself. Anything you do helps to fight the depression. So, where do you start? Anywhere. Just make it simple. And begin. Read article... Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment What is wrong with this scenario? When Gina told her doctor she was feeling depressed, he gave her a screening test that asked about her symptoms: little interest in doing things, feeling depressed or hopeless, sleep problems, lack of energy, poor appetite or overeating, feelings of failure, problems concentrating, restlessness or slow movements, and thoughts of self-harm. Other than suicidal thoughts, Gina endorsed all of the symptoms and scored high on the test. Her doctor immediately prescribed an anti-depressant. Read more... Educational Audios Depression Assistance and Education Managing Insomnia Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury Coping Audios Mindfulness Relaxation Something Good About Depression? One common problem for those with depression is the inability to think clearly. However, the research shows that understanding this problem is complex. In fact, with certain types of tasks people with clinical depression exceed the abilities of those without depression. How is that possible? It may be that people with depression are more greatly impacted by problems with motivation than with an inability to reason. Read more... Depression is Not Sadness A serious problem exists with the public's understanding of depression. The problem occurs because of the clinical term "Major Depression" and the general use of the word "depression." One of the definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary indicates that depression is "a state of feeling sad." Therefore, the general public typically defines "depression" interchangeably with "sadness" as in "I'm so depressed today." The tendency, then, is to assume that clinical depression is just extreme sadness or the inability to handle normal stress and sadness of life. This assumption is not only wrong but it is a disservice to all individuals who experience one of the clinical forms of depression: Read more... Understanding Mindfulness Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Step 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Mindfulness Practice Exercises Create a more mindful life... Depression CBT Self-Help Guide Excel At Life's Android app provides resources in a convenient and interactive form. Listen to audios Read articles Complete cognitive diary Track symptoms Motivational statements Track activities Share with therapist Password protected Install apps Depression CBT Self-Help Guide CBT Tools for Healthy Living Stop Panic & Anxiety Self-help Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury I refer to illness or injury as an assault on the body because that is how the body experiences itas a threat to the system. Often I find that people suffering from illness or injury (or recovering from surgery) don't recognize that their body has been assaulted. As a result, they tend to downplay the impact the illness may have on their system and ignore their body's need for recovery. However, the body recognizes that it has been assaulted. Which is why it mobilizes all its resources to fight back. Doing so takes energy which often results in secondary symptoms. These symptoms commonly include feelings of weakness, general feelings of discomfort, lack of energy, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, and depressed mood. Read more... It's Not as Simple as Being Grateful My concern about the emphasis on gratitude as a treatment for anxiety and depression is that...it can become another way of dismissing suffering and blaming the sufferer... ...research...has shown that gratitude interventions have a weak effect on well-being. This means that these techniques can be helpful to some degree especially for those who are minimally distressed and dealing with everyday problems. However, such techniques are not a substitute for other treatments for those with anxiety and depression. Read more... Cognitive-behavioral Therapy (CBT) CBT has been shown to be beneficial for many suffering from depression. Articles What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety How do we Change Irrational Thinking? Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary Cognitive Diary Example: Hopelessness Due to Depression To Should? Or, Not To Should? Demand Thinking How Does Cognitive Therapy Help Depression? Treatment Resistant Depression isn't Resistant to Cognitive Therapy Problem with Depression and CBT: It Can Be Overwhelming Self-esteem Audios Self-Esteem Blackboard Self-Esteem Train Self-Esteem Self-Talk All self-esteem improvement audios Articles 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy Does Loving Yourself Make You a Narcissist? All self-concept articles Why People with Depression Avoid Positive Experiences ...when researchers prevented thirsty people from getting a drink of water, the unconscious reaction was to place less importance on the need for water. Similarly, the same process occurs for those with depression. Think of this concept multiplied by the numerous attempts people with depression make to feel better only to be disappointed again and again. It makes sense that eventually they place less importance on positive experiences and their mood will worsen. Read more... Sleep Disturbance Sleep problems are a hallmark symptom of depression. The relaxation, mindfulness, and cognitive methods can help improve sleep quality and reduce the impact of depression. Audios Managing Insomnia Mindful Breathing Articles The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Insomnia: Worrying About Not Sleeping Can Sleeping Pills Shorten Your Life? Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Excel At Life On the Web Pursuing Excellence in Life, Relationships, Sports, and Career The Best Depression Apps of 2016 HealthLine says about Excel At Life's Depression CBT Self-help Guide: "Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is one approach to managing depression and other mental health problems. This app helps you monitor your moods with an assessment test that tracks the severity of your depressed moods and provides several resources aimed at educating you about the flawed thought patterns that may be worsening your depression. There are also audio programs for relaxation and depression assistance." Top 10 CBT Worksheets Websites Excel At Life Guided imagery and mindfulness meditation are often used as part of a CBT approach to treatment. This site offers a range of free audio downloads for a variety of needs. These downloads can be used in the office or as part of a homework assignment. This site offers several CBT resources for the practitioner as well as the client seeking self-directed support including informative articles and forms such as a mood diary and various questionnaires. This site is exceptionally user-friendly. Read article at Uncommon Practitioners... Let Your Phone Be Your Therapist: 7 Psych Apps That Really Work Cognitive Diary CBT Self Help, an app for Android devices, works similarly, allowing users to write down their troublesome thoughts, challenge them and review progress. Depression CBT Self-Help Guide includes a screening test to monitor moods, a cognitive thought diary to learn how to challenge stressful thinking, articles on CBT and a tracking feature. Read article at Bottomline Inc... 3 Tried & Tested Apps to Get You Started with Meditation Qi Gong Meditation & Relaxation This is one of the best kept secrets of the mediation app world, (well if there was a meditation app world, and they kept secrets, then this would definitely be up there with the best kept ones). This app is packed full of meditation and mindfulness audio AND video. Ok so the UI isnt as fancy as the other two, but it packs in a lot of value for a free app. The audios are skilfully created and can guide even the most unimaginative person into a place of peace and calm. You can choose to have a guided mindfulness audio to transport you to a mountain cabin, sunrise on the beach and even riding a horse across the plains. Read article at Breathe Woman... Healthline's Top Eating Disorder Apps of 2015 One of Excel At Life's apps have been selected among the 13 best apps of 2015 for eating disorders: Cognitive Diary CBT Self-Help: "Destructive thoughts are one of the most damaging aspects of an eating disorder. The negative opinions you have about yourself, and the self-hate you direct towards your body can be damaging and long-lasting. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a powerful tool that can help change your thought patterns and improve your mental state. Many mental health professionals request that patients keep an ongoing journal to record their feelings, as well as the events that may have affected their mood. This app makes it easier to do than toting around a pencil and paper all day." (Healthline) Healthline's Top Anxiety Apps of 2014 Three of Excel At Life's apps have been selected among the 18 best anxiety apps of 2014: Qi Gong Meditation Relaxation: "Qi Gong is a traditional Chinese health system that brings together posture, breathing, and the mind to reduce anxiety. This Android app connects users with a library of relaxation videos that contain instructions for relaxing and clearing the mind. The videos are created by Dr. Monica Frank, a psychologist with more than 20 years of experience. In addition to viewing Dr. Franks videos, you can read a variety of articles related to anxiety, meditation, and stress management." (Healthline) Worry Box--Anxiety Self-Help: "Have you ever wished you could put all your worries in a box, leave them there, and walk away? The Worry Box app may let you do just that. The app functions a lot like a journal: Write down your thoughts, anxieties, and worries, and let the app help you think them through. It will ask questions, give specific anxiety-reducing help, and can even direct you to help you reduce your worries and anxiety. It is all password protected, so you can feel safe sharing the details of your stresses." (Healthline) Stop Panic & Anxiety Help: "If panic and anxiety attacks have a grip on your life, this app might help you let them go. The Stop Panic & Anxiety Help Android app uses emotion and relaxation training audio tracks to help you fight your fears and find a state of calm. When you’ve overcome the attack, use the app’s journal to record what caused the attack and how you were able to get through it. Then use this journal to learn from your experiences and prepare for the future." (Healthline) Healthline's Top Depression Apps of 2014 Two of Excel At Life's apps have been selected among the 18 best depression apps of 2014: Happy Habits: Choose Happiness: "The Happy Habits app uses the principles of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to improve your mood. CBT helps you change the way you think about the people and things in your life. By thinking differently, your feelings and actions will also change. The app features a 119-question quiz covering 14 factors that affect your mood. Based on your answers, Happy Habits provides suggestions to create more happiness in your life. Other features include audio components, a happiness journal to record affirmations and positive events, and articles about CBT and happiness." (Healthline) Depression CBT Self-Help Guide: "Stress from many different sources can contribute to depression. But, with the help of the Depression CBT Self-Help Guide, you can manage your stress. The app helps you understand the causes of depression, and it explains self-help behaviors you can adopt to reduce symptoms. Read articles about cognitive behavioral therapy and listen to audio tracks that help you meditate and relax. Use the Cognitive Thought Diary to identify stressful thinking and respond with positive feedback. The app even includes a feature that helps measure the severity of your depression. " (Healthline) Healthline's Top Eating Disorder Apps of 2014 One of Excel At Life's apps have been selected among the 13 best apps of 2014 for eating disorders: Cognitive Diary CBT Self-Help: "Destructive thoughts are one of the most damaging aspects of an eating disorder. The negative opinions you have about yourself, and the self-hate you direct towards your body can be damaging and long-lasting. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a powerful tool that can help change your thought patterns and improve your mental state. Many mental health professionals request that patients keep an ongoing journal to record their feelings, as well as the events that may have affected their mood. This app makes it easier to do than toting around a pencil and paper all day." (Healthline) Download These Free Relaxation Audios October 8, 2013 by Stacy Juba, Author of Adult, Teen, and Children's Books "The area that I wanted to highlight in particular is their downloadable meditation audios. I love these! When I found this website through a free app, shortly after I began meditating, I was stunned by the number of audios they were offering for free. As I started listening to them, I was thrilled with the professional quality and the vivid imagery." Read More... Qi Gong Meditation Relaxation Forbes.com: 7 Apps To Beat Stress In The Workplace, September 25, 2013 "This app, available on Google Play for Android, claims to not only calm you down through meditation, but alsoteachyou a thing or two about the techniques that youre using. That could come in handy when youre forced to explain to your coworkers why youre camped out on the floor of your cubicle in the lotus position saying ommm, ommm. Cost: FREE " Healthline.com: The 17 Best Anxiety iPhone & Android Apps of 2013, August 8, 2013 "Qi Gong Meditation Relaxation is an Android app that utilizes a series of short videos to unclutter the mind and de-stress the body. Developed by renowned psychologist Dr. Monica Frank, this free app can take your mind off of all the stresses of the world in just a few minutes. With titles like “Mountain Cabin,” “Rainbow Emotions,” and “Sunrise on the Beach,” these videos can be used as a part of other forms of meditation you use to manage anxiety symptoms. Each video is equipped with soothing audio, breathing instructions, and recommendations for muscle relaxation." Buzzle: 10 Best Meditation Apps, September 12, 2013 An extremely handy app for people who want to seriously take up meditation, Qi Gong Meditation Relaxation provides users with easy-to-use techniques to calm the mind. The app features detailed articles about various methods of relaxation and meditation. It also gives you access to videos of famous psychologist Dr. Monica Frank, explaining the ways to attain meditative Qi Gong. Depression CBT Self-Help Guide Healthline.com: 17 Best Depression iPhone & Android Apps of 2013, August 12, 2013 "The notion of happiness can often seem unattainable when youre battling depression. The Depression CBT Self-Help Guide helps you cope with feelings of sadness with techniques for transforming stress into positive thinking. Equipped with a daily diary, this app helps you identify stress patterns that can complement cognitive behavioral therapy. This interactive app also provides suggestions for coping with stress and is equipped with informative articles to better understand depression. As a bonus, the Depression CBT Self-Help Guide has audio sounds to listen to wherever and whenever you need to take a breather from everyday stress." Stop Panic & Anxiety Self-Help Healthline.com: 17 Best Anxiety iPhone & Android Apps of 2013, August 12, 2013 "One way to control anxiety is to stop it in its tracks. Stop Panic & Anxiety Self-Help is an app that can help you accomplish this. With a vast library of informative articles to help you prevent panic attacks and control daily stress, this is a one-stop app for what you want to know about anxiety management. A daily diary allows you to jot down important moments that caused you anxiety so you can reference them in the future. This free Android app also includes audio bites for emotion training, panic assistance, and relaxation when you need an extra helping hand" Worry Box--Anxiety Self-Help Healthline.com: 17 Best Anxiety iPhone & Android Apps of 2013, August 12, 2013 "Dont you just wish you could throw all your worries away? While you cant make all your troubles disappear, you can put them in a box. With the Worry Box---Anxiety Self-Help app, you can have your own virtual box to contain your worries in. This free Android app works similarly to a diary, but it also asks you questions pertaining to your concerns. Questions include whether the worry is controllable and whether it is important. This interactive tool gives you techniques needed to control anxiety in the long-term. It also helps you let go of stress today. As a bonus, you also receive free advice on worry management." Happy Habits: Choose Happiness BestSelfHelpApps.com: Review "Happy Habits: Choose Happiness uses the techniques of cognitive-behavioral therapy from the positive psychology research to provide comprehensive tools to help create the conditions for happiness in your life. Our thoughts: Cool feature of Your Happiness Assessment119 item test assessing 14 factors that can affect happiness. We like the option to put our own background picture, although the existing ones look really good. Great for identifying your negative patterns. Summary: This is one of the best self-happiness apps on the market! With its numerous features and very useful tips, youll find yourself full of happiness after applying tips from this great app. " Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Lies You Were Taught as a Child If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Lies You Were Taught as a Child This audio is to assist those who have been emotionally abused as a child. It discusses the lies you were told as a child by the abuser which can continue to affect your adult life. Learn how to refute these lies. If you have experienced these lies as a child, listening to this audio repeatedly can help you begin to change the impact of these lies in your life. The more you recognize that what you were told was a lie and learn to counter these lies, the more you can create a more fulfilling life. Also, using Excel At Life's Self Esteem Blackboard app can help you to challenge the inaccurate beliefs that you have about yourself because of the lies that were told you as a child. TRANSCRIPT Listen Transcript: Lies You Were Taught as a Child The following is for adults who have suffered trauma as a child particularly abuse by the responsible adults in their lives. Abuse includes physical, emotional and sexual. However, what this audio addresses is the emotional abuse which is present whenever physical and sexual abuse occurs as well as occurring by itself. Although the act of abuse is horrible, the worst part often is the long-term consequences suffered by those who have been abused. Those long-term consequences occur because of what you were taught to believe about yourself. The abuse taught you lies about yourself and because of those lies you continue to suffer in adulthood. First, it is important to recognize that the past can no longer hurt you. This may be difficult for trauma survivors to understand because everything within them indicates that the past still DOES hurt. However, what continues to hurt is not the past itself from what you learned about yourself because of the past experiences. Those who have been abused have learned that they are worthless or unlovable. But that is not the past that hurts you now, that is the presentthe current belief that you are unlovable, undeserving, or worthless. Again, this is a present belief that hurtsnot the past. The past taught you these things, but the past no longer exists and no longer hurts you. Your hurt is in the present. It may have been fueled by past experiences, but the hurt is NOW. There is one exception to what I just said and that is if the people who hurt you in the past are still hurting you in your present life. But again, that is not about the past, that is about the present hurt that you are experiencing. The fortunate thing about your hurt being now and not in the past, is that you can do something about the present. You can change the present beliefs that continue to hurt you. You can recognize that these beliefs that you learned from the past are wrong. They were taught to you by sick or disturbed people who did not treat you properly as you deserved to be treated. Instead, you were hurt and abused and taught to believe things about yourself that are not true. The following is to refute some of those lies you were taught about yourself. If you find that the information in this audio fits your situation, it is important to listen to this audio repeatedly until you believe the new information about yourself. Just as you were told the lies over in over until you were brain-washed into believing these terrible lies about yourself, you can tell yourself the truth over and over until the truth becomes stronger than the lies. As you begin to believe the truth about yourself, you will also find yourself making changes to improve your life. It can also be helpful to write down any of the following lies that you learned and remind yourself that they are lies whenever you find yourself acting or feeling based on that lie. Remind yourself that it is a lie that you no longer wish to believe. A common lie told by emotional abusers is: "You will never amount to anything." We can know this is a lie because no one can determine what a child will be able to do as an adult. Some of the most incorrigible children have been very successful as adults and some of the most obedient children have not accomplished much. Someone who makes such a statement is deliberately cruel and hurtful or horribly ignorant because there is never any beneficial reason to make such a statement to a child. Such a statement is not motivating, but is only hurtful. A child who hears this frequently will develop uncertainty and doubt instead of confidence. Unfortunately, this lie can create a self-fulfilling prophecy. If it is told enough to a child, the child comes to believe it which can prevent the child from trying to achieve because he or she believes that failure will always occur. As a result, it may be reinforced in the adult life and the liar and the lie becomes validated. "Yeah, my parents said I would never amount to anything. I guess they knew what they were talking about." However, the lie is not true! The only reason the outcome of failure occurred is because of the belief in the lie. If you were taught that no matter what you did you would succeed, you would have a different belief about yourself. And likely, a different outcome. To change the belief in this lie, you must begin to look at yourself objectively. Examine the evidence of who you are and what you are capable of. Choose different beliefs that can motivate you. For instance, you can choose to believe that as long as you keep trying there is no failure. Why is such a belief true? Because no one can be fully judged until their life is ended. So as long as you continue to try, continue to grow, continue to learn, you haven't failed. It is not fair to judge yourself today because your life isn't complete. And because you can't really judge yourself once you are gone, it really doesn't make sense to judge yourself at all. Therefore, instead of judging yourself, focus on doing. Do what you can do today to make your life better. Learn to believe in yourself. And just keep trying! Another lie often told by perfectionistic, critical parents is: "If you can't do it right, don't do it at all." This lie doesn't even make sense when examined closely. For instance, how can you possibly learn to do anything if you believe this lie?! All this lie does is create fear of trying for fear of making a mistake. Instead, tell yourself "It is always better to try than not doing it at all. I can't learn to do it right if I don't try." Be willing to make mistakes! Mistakes provide us with important lessons. The most successful people in this world have also made the most mistakes because they are willing to take risks, try, and even fail. But ultimately the outcome is success because they keep trying. A very destructive lie told by controlling abusers is: "No one will ever love you like I do." This lie is particularly destructive because it makes the child confuse love with the mistreatment he or she has received at the hands of an adult caretaker. The purpose of this lie is to make the child believe that the abuser is benevolent and does everything out of love for the childeven the abuse! Adults who have come to believe this lie may also find themselves in relationships in which this lie is repeated. A spouse might tell them the same thing: "No one will ever love you like I do." This statement is almost always within an abusive relationship. People in normal relationships do not say this because they recognize that it is a lie. It is possible to be loved by many people. Another destructive aspect of this belief is that it makes the victim believe that he or she is unlovable by any normal person. They come to believe that to be loved, they have to put up with abuse. They have learned that love and abuse go hand in hand. However, this is a lie! Someone who loves you does not abuse you. You do not need to tolerate abuse to be loved. There are good people in this world who can love without abusing. Do not believe that the only way you can be loved is by someone who will hurt you. Because, unfortunately, this belief can also lead to a self-fulfilling prophecy in which you may find yourself repeatedly in abusive relationships which then reinforce the belief. Instead, believe that you deserve to be loved by someone who will treat you well. Also, although it may be difficult, learn to recognize that it is better to not be loved than to be loved by someone who hurts you. By doing so you will be loving yourself which is much more important. Another common lie told by abusive parents or caretakers is: "You should respect me--I'm your parent." The reason this is a lie is because respect is earned, not received by demand. Typically, parents who say this are not deserving of respect. They expect to be respected due to their status as a parent. However, respect is a feeling based upon admiring someone due to their abilities, qualities, or achievements. Respecting a parent means that you admire their parental qualities and behavior. Respect is based upon how a child is treated by that parent as he or she is growing up. If the parent treats the child with respect it is likely that the child will do the same. However, abusive parents are not respectful of the child. They neither admire nor appreciate the child's qualities and achievements. Yet, they demand that respect be given. Because respect is an emotion, it can not be demanded of someone. Emotions are natural reactions to a person or situation. They can not be created on a whim due to a demand. A child can not normally be forced to feel something that isn't accurate. And if they are forced to feel a certain way, it is a form of brain-washing and isn't accurate. The parent badgers and berates the child until the child has a misconception of what respect truly means. The child thinks he or she feels respect when what the child really feels is fear. To combat this lie recognize that it is okay to feel what you feel. If you don't respect your parent, it is because of how you were treated. It is not because you are ungrateful or selfish. It is because your parent didn't earn your respect. It is up to adults to create a safe and respectful environment. Often abusers try to reframe reality. For instance, a common lie told by an emotional abuser is: "You were never abused--I never hit you." They try to make the child believe that no abuse occurred because there wasn't any physical violence. However, the reality is that emotional abuse can frequently be the worst kind of abuse because it affects the child at a core level: it affects the child's self-concept. Therefore, it is important to recognize that even if you weren't hit, you could have still been abused. It is important to evaluate it based upon the intention and the effect it had on you. If you are uncertain, obtain another opinion. Find out if the way you were treated was normal and acceptable. If it was not, recognize that you were not at fault for how you feel. However, you do have to take responsibility now for the direction of your life in adulthood. Abusers will often hurt a child and then ridicule the child about the emotional response with the lie: "You are weak if you cry" or "You are too sensitive." This allows the abuser to feel that he or she did nothing wrong and that the child's hurt response is exaggerated. The abuser is telling the child that his or her feelings or wrong. As a result, the child grows into an adult not trusting the normal emotional response. And instead, believes that something is wrong with crying or feeling hurt. This is a lie because our emotions provide information about the world. When we cry it means we have been hurt. It is important to recognize that if you are hurt, you are doing nothing wrong if you feel hurt and if you cry. That is a natural expression of an emotion. The abuser told you lies to protect him or herself. You have a right to feel what you feel. It is a natural response to a behavior. In addition, believing this lie prevents you from grieving the wrongs that have been done to you. Grief is a healing process necessary to recovering from abuse. Another lie abused children may be told is: "You should be ashamed of yourself." Even if a child has engaged in a terrible transgression against others, this statement should not be used because it is shaming the person rather than focusing on the behavior. It makes the child feel as if he or she is bad which is not very changeable rather than the behavior is wrong which is changeable. Many people who have been abused as children feel guilt as adults even when they have done nothing wrong. It may be due to having been shamed as a child or made to feel as if they were a bad person rather than focusing on the behavior. Typically, the people who have truly done something wrong, such as your abuser, don't feel guilt. Frequently, the victims of abuse have been made to feel that they are bad or even that they caused the abuser to hurt them. Certainly, if you have done something wrong, it is appropriate to feel guilt. But if you feel guilt when you haven't done anything wrong or for very minor things that others wouldn't even consider bad such as setting a limit with someone, it may be due to this lie that you have come to believe--this lie that something is wrong with you. Whatever the particulars are, it is important to recognize that you feel bad about yourself because that is what you were taught. It is not who you truly are. The abuser was the one who was guilty of causing pain and hurt. Don't believe what the abuser told you about yourself. Another lie that abusers teach is to not question authority: "I'm an adult, so do as I say." Although many parents do expect children to obey them, the abusive parent or caretaker does not tolerate any questioning of their behavior or authority. Most normal parents will explain to children the reasons for their expectations. But abusers want to be obeyed without any question. This is particularly troublesome because their behavior is the very behavior that should be questioned. Authority is not right just because. Authority is to serve a purpose such as to protect us or to maintain order so that we can learn and grow. But just because someone is an adult or an authority does not give them the right to control us through abusive methods. With this lie it is important to understand that it is okay to question. Feel free to question until you are satisfied. Don't follow others' demands without evaluating the appropriateness. Someone who has your best interests in mind will not abuse you in the name of authority or power. Finally, some abusers give the message: "I won't love you if you misbehave." Actually, this may not be a lie because the abuser may truly mean that if the child doesn't behave in the way he or she wants, then they won't love the child. However, the lie is that they loved the child in the first place. Love doesn't come with strings attached. When a child misbehaves, it is the parent's job to teach appropriate behavior. However, that isn't done through withholding love. For a child to feel safe he or she must be sure of the love from the adults present in his or her life. Through that certainty the child can develop a normal curiosity and experiment with the world. Normal parents will help the child by setting limits in a loving way. The other part of this statement that is a lie is that a person who threatens to withhold love really isn't capable of true love in the first place. They don't understand the selflessness of love. Instead, they are making love about control. So, don't believe that you have to allow someone to control you to be loved. Love is not about control! In fact, the opposite is true. Love is letting someone be free to grow in the way they were meant to. There may be more lies that you were told as a child. By recognizing some of these common ones you may also begin to recognize some of the ones that were more specific to your experience. As I said at the beginning, if this audio seems relevant to your situation, it is important to listen to it frequently until you can recognize the lies and refuse to let those lies control your life. So, let's review what you want to tell yourself instead of these lies. Instead of judging yourself, focus on doing. Do what you can do today to make your life better. Learn to believe in yourself. And just keep trying! Be willing to make mistakes! Mistakes provide us with important lessons. Believe that you deserve to be loved by someone who will treat you well. Recognize that if you don't respect your parent, it is because of how you were treated. It is not because you are ungrateful or selfish. It is because your parent didn't earn your respect. It is up to adults to create a safe and respectful environment. Recognize that you were not at fault for how you feel. But that you do have to take responsibility now for the direction of your life in adulthood. Recognize that if you are hurt, you are doing nothing wrong if you feel hurt and if you cry. That is a natural expression of an emotion. You have a right to feel what you feel. Recognize that you feel bad about yourself because that is what you were taught. It is not who you truly are. Don't believe what the abuser told you about yourself. Understand that you don't need to blindly follow authority. Feel free to question until you are satisfied. Don't follow others' demands without evaluating the appropriateness. Someone who has your best interests in mind will not abuse you in the name of authority or power. Finally, don't believe that you have to allow someone to control you to be loved. Love is not about control! In fact, the opposite is true. Love is letting someone be free to grow in the way they were meant to. Remind yourself frequently of these lies so that they don't continue to control your life. Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Use Your Head! And Your Heart! If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Use Your Head! And Your Heart! by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "We need to determine the validity of our emotions before we act on them." Tweet Amber woke up in an irritable mood. She figured something must be bothering her and started thinking about her relationship with her boyfriend. He doesn't really care about me. He's always focused on doing what he wants. He can really be a jerk. When he called her later, she was very cold and unresponsive to his inquiries regarding what was wrong. This escalated into an argument. Amber hung up saying to herself, See, he really is a jerk. The problem with this scenario is Amber reacted to her mood by finding something she was irritated about and magnifying it. She did not consider other possibilities for her mood. For instance, she had been out late the night before and her sleep schedule was disrupted which could have caused the irritability. As a result, she created a self-fulfilling prophecy about her boyfriend She treated him as if he were a jerk which then escalated into conflict confirming what she believed. However, if she had approached him in a different way, the outcome may have been very different. If she had said, I'm feeling irritable today. I don't really know why instead of being passive-aggressive, they may not have had an argument. This is an example of emotional reasoning. DEFINITION OF EMOTIONAL REASONING Emotional reasoning is the belief that if you feel something, it must be true. For instance, If I feel guilty, I must have done something wrong. But sometimes we feel guilty when someone makes an accusation. Or, people who are highly empathetic may feel guilty when they observe something that someone else has done. Although emotions are important, this type of belief emphasizes the emotion over the evaluation of the emotion. We need to determine the validity of our emotions before we act on them. Sometimes emotions occur because of our physical state (as in the above example). Sometimes they occur because a present situation is similar to a past situation and we are reacting to the past. Sometimes emotions occur because of how we feel about ourselves generally. Sometimes we misinterpret emotions. Not all emotions are accurate and directly related to our present situation. Therefore, we need to recognize them, interpret them accurately, and evaluate the evidence. IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONS 1) Information. Emotions provide us with information. Much of what we experience in the world around us is non-verbal. Our brains constantly interpret all this information that we gather. Much of this information is interpreted at the sub-conscious level. As such, it tends to affect our emotions without our awareness. 2) Release. Emotions provide a release for us. When we cry, laugh, get angry, we release tension we may be experiencing. This mechanism helps us cope with the stress of our lives. 3) Communication. Emotions provide a means of communication. Notice how often gestures, facial expressions, or posture is used to express information in a conversation. Most of these non-verbals have emotional content. In fact, it is very difficult to express non-emotional content through body language. IMPORTANCE OF LOGIC 1) Information. The logical part of our brain also provides information. It processes the evidence and examines the facts. 2) Evaluation. Logic helps determine what information is valid based on the available evidence. It allows us to determine the validity of an emotion. If Amber had used her logical brain to evaluate the evidence before reacting she might have determined Wait a minute. He often spends time with me and is very considerate of my needs. I don't usually feel this way about him. Maybe this isn't about him. RESEARCH STUDY ON INTERPRETING EMOTIONAL STATES A research study many years ago examined how people interpret their emotional states. What they found was that people tend to use environmental cues to explain what they are feeling unless they have information that provides an explanation. The study involved giving subjects an injection of adrenalin that caused them to feel physically agitated and then placing the subjects in a waiting room with another subject. Half of the subjects were told what physical symptoms to expect from the injection and the other half were not given an explanation. The other subject in the room was actually an actor who was part of the experiment. The subject-actor started expressing a great deal of anger, Why are they making us wait? Don't they think our time is valuable? They are very inconsiderate. The subjects were then questioned about their experience. Those who knew the injection would cause agitation and other symptoms indicated that they were feeling the effects of the injection but didn't report any significant emotional reactions. However, those who were not given an explanation reported that they felt angry. The subjects who had not been given any explanation used the cues from their environment to explain the agitation they were feeling. The major cue was someone else's anger about the situation. Therefore, they came to believe they were angry, too. MANAGING EMOTIONAL REASONING 1) Recognition of Tendency. Some people have a greater tendency than others to be emotionally reactive which means they are responding with emotions prior to evaluating the emotions. Try to recognize whether you have this tendency. Then, you will at least be able to say, Maybe I'm engaging in emotional reasoning. I need to look at the evidence. 2) Determining the Evidence. When you are reacting to an emotion, ask yourself what is the evidence that supports the emotion and what is the evidence that is contrary to the emotion. In particular, determine if there could possibly be any other causes for the reaction you have. Could something from the past have been triggered? Or, is there something physical you are experiencing that could explain your feeling? 3) Evaluate the Emotion. Based on the evidence you have examined, is the emotion valid? If the emotion is valid, is it an appropriate intensity? Sometimes it may be something that is bothering you but your reaction is out of proportion to the actual event. 4) Challenge the Emotion. If the emotion is not valid or the intensity is out of proportion remind yourself of the evidence that you have examined. As with all cognitive techniques this practice of examining and challenging the emotion needs to be repetitive until you are able to accept the challenge to your thinking. CONCLUSION We use both the emotions we gather from our interactions in the world and the logical examination of the evidence to accurately interpret our experiences. One without the other can create problems. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Privacy Policy Last update: May 22, 2020 Excel At Life, LLC operates the website located at the uniform resource locator ("URL") www.excelatlife.com. In addition, Excel At Life provides several mobile applications ("apps"). Excel At Life respects the privacy of all visitors to its website. This Privacy Policy discloses the privacy and information practices for www.ExcelAtLife.com. Please read this policy before using the website or the apps. Summary. Excel At Life does NOT collect or maintain any personally identifiable information from its website or its mobile apps. Users may visit the website anonymously. The Information Excel At Life Collects. Excel At Life may collect personal information that website visitors or mobible app users provide when contacting Excel At Life through email. The types of information that may be collected include name and email address. Excel At Life only collects personally identifiable information that is provided voluntarily by the user. How Excel At Life Uses the Information. If you provide an email address, it may be used to send you information, company news, updates, and/or related product or service information. You may unsubscribe from emails at any time by contacting ExcelAtLife.com. Personal information you provide may be used to respond to customer service inquiries. When responding to customer service inquiries, Excel At Life uses the email address or other contact information provided in the inquiry. Email addresses or other contact information may be stored for future reference with customer service disputes or as needed to respond to requests or to verify a customers identity. Excel At Life has apps available for download through the Google Play store. Excel at Life receives the country of origin from each download and tracks traffic and usage of its website and apps. Excel At Life does not collect personally identifiable information from our app users, nor does it sell this information to third parties. User-generated content from the apps is stored in the users mobile device and/or a cloud database maintained by Google (Firebase) and personally identifiable information is not shared with, reviewed by, or accessed by anyone. Excel At Life's free apps and website contain advertising generated by Google, Inc. and its affiliated companies. Google advertising services collects information subject to Googles privacy policy, which can be found at Privacy Policy and How Google Uses Information from Sites or Apps that Use Our Services. You can manage the Google ads you see using the Google Ads Preference Manager, available at Ad Preferences. Excel At Life also offers paid apps which contain no advertising. Paid apps can be purchased through the Google Play store. Google Play may require users to provide certain personal information in order to complete purchase transactions. Excel At Life does not have access to this information, nor does Excel At Life store the information or sell it to third parties. Google Play collects and shares the personal information provided by consumers according to its Terms of Service. Please review the Terms of Service, which can be found at Google Play Terms, prior to purchasing apps through Google Play. Excel At Life may be required by law enforcement or judicial authorities to provide personal information to the appropriate governmental authorities. Personal information will be disclosed upon receipt of a court order, subpoena, or to cooperate with a law enforcement investigation. Excel At Life reserves the right to report to law enforcement agencies any activities that Excel At Life in good faith believes to be unlawful. Research. Excel At Life is committed to the advancement of psychology and psychological resources. Your use of this site and/or apps and other resources signifies your agreement to use your ANONYMOUS data for the purposes of research. Such research shall be for improving these products provided by Excel At Life as well as for the advancement of psychological science. Data will be used consistent with the ethical guidelines of the American Psychological Association. From time to time, users may be asked to participate in research for which additional consent will be required. If this occurs you will be provided with an additional privacy policy related to that research. Security. Excel at Life, LLC has put in place appropriate measures to safeguard and help prevent unauthorized access, maintain data security, and correctly use the information Excel At Life collects on our site. Unfortunately, no data transmission over the internet or any wireless network can be guaranteed to be 100% secure. Although appropriate measures to safeguard against unauthorized disclosures of information is taken, Excel At Life cannot assure you that information you provide will never be disclosed in a manner that is inconsistent with this Privacy Policy. Cookies. Cookies are pieces of information that a website transfers to an individuals hard drive that can be retrieved later to identify you. The use of cookies is standard on the internet. Excel At Life may use cookies in order to monitor website traffic and/or to recognize return visitors as a way to facilitate and customize your use of the site. Excel At Life does not maintain any personally identifiable information or use information transferred through cookies for any promotional or marketing purposes, nor is information sold to third parties. Most internet browsers are set to automatically accept cookies. By modifying your browser preferences, you have the choice to accept all cookies, to be notified when a cookie is set, or to reject all cookies. If you reject all cookies, Excel At Life cannot guarantee that all parts of its site will function properly. Collection of Information by Third Parties. This site contains links to other sites whose information practices may be different than ours. Excel At Life has no control over information that is submitted to, or collected by, these third parties. Each third party has its own privacy policy, and customers should consult the third party privacy policy before providing any personal information. Please contact these third parties directly if you have any questions about their use of the information that they collect. Google. For your convenience, the Android backup service provided by Google is enabled in the Android mobile applications provided by Excel At Life. You are responsible for enabling the settings on your device for allowing/disallowing this service. If you use Google's cloud backup service, your privacy is subject to Google's Privacy Policy. Excel At Life has no access to your data saved by using the backup service. Google assures that they encrypt this data and do not have access to it. In addition, the site and apps contain advertising provided by Google, Inc. and its affiliated companies which contains links to third party websites. Excel At Life does not select the advertising that is placed on its site by Google Ads, and Excel At Life does not endorse any of the companies which advertise through Google Ads. You can control your privacy settings by visiting Google's My Account. Disqus. Visitors to the website may comment on articles using a service provided by Disqus. Excel At Life does not have access to personally identifiable information from Disqus, nor does Excel At Life store the information or sell it to third parties. Disqus collects and shares the personal information provided by consumers according to its Terms of Service/Privacy Policy. Please review its Privacy Policy, which can be found at Disqus Privacy Policy. Childrens Privacy Policy. Excel At Life believes that with proper parental supervision, some of our website or mobile app content could be beneficial to children in the same manner that it benefits our adult visitors. Excel At Life does not knowingly collect personal information from children under 13 years of age without the prior, verifiable consent of his or her parent or legal representative. If Excel At Life becomes aware that a child has posted personal information on its website the content will be removed. Excel At Life does not offer games or contests that would request personal information from children. Miscellaneous. This Privacy Policy, and all claims or issues regarding our site, shall be governed according to the laws of the State of Missouri, without giving effect to any conflicts of laws principles. Except as otherwise required by law, any legal action concerning this Privacy Policy or our site must be brought within one (1) year after the claim or cause of action arises and must be brought in the State of Missouri. You hereby waive any argument that any such court does not have jurisdiction over you or such dispute or that venue in any such court is not appropriate or convenient. If any part of this Privacy Policy is deemed invalid or enforceable, the remainder of this Privacy Policy shall continue in effect. Any failure to insist upon strict enforcement of this policy shall not be construed as a waiver of any provision of right contained in this policy. Your Acceptance of These Terms. By using https://www.excelatlife.com and/or any of its apps or other resources, you signify your assent to this Privacy Policy. If you do not agree to this policy, please do not use the site. Excel At Life reserves the right to change, modify, add, or remove portions of this policy at any time. If Excel At Life changes its privacy policy, those changes will be posted on this page. Please check this page periodically for changes. Your continued use of this site following the posting of changes will signify your acceptance of those changes. Contact Us. Please contact Excel At Life if you have any questions or concerns about this privacy policy: excelatlife@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Power of the Mind: The Wellness Philosophy by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "What does it mean to focus on wellness? Basically, it means life style enhancements that protects the individual's physical well-being and improves the ability to cope with stressors." Tweet WHAT IS THE WELLNESS PHILOSOPHY? Too often, mental health professionals focus on treating illness rather than maintaining wellness. However, the skills we bring to the treatment of psychological disorders are the same skills that can aid people with enhancing wellness. More importantly, the focus on wellness can prevent the life disruption caused by illness and the need for further treatment. What does it mean to focus on wellness? Basically, it means life style enhancements that protects the individual's physical well-being and improves the ability to cope with stressors. Frequently, these are simple techniques that most people just don't take the time to include in their lives. How many times have you said or heard others say, "I don't have time to exercise" or "I don't have time to relax?" Thus, a very important contributor to wellness is attitude: a thought process that influences the way a person approaches dealing with life. Whether we allow ourselves to recognize it or not, we choose the type of thinking and approach we have to the world. This choice then influences other choices. For example, we may choose to think we have to prove ourselves as an employee or as a parent by perfectly meeting the demands of others. With such an attitude we will more likely forego our own needs in order to meet the expectations we believe others have of us. Our awareness of our ability to make choices can be a powerful factor in our experience of life. Too frequently, people believe that they can't have an impact on their lives, that they are just helpless victims of fate or of other people's behaviors. The truth is, however, that we have the choice available to us to be responsible for our lives. Even when someone has been mistreated or abused, they still have choices available to them. We can choose to blame others for our life situation or we can choose to examine ourselves and see what we can do about it. The power of our mind can greatly determine whether we will be healthy and happy. HOW CAN I TAP INTO THIS POWER OF THE MIND? You can start by examining your thinking styles for irrational reasoning. Look for the following cues: 1) A tendency to blame other people for how you feel. If you are unhappy, it isn't because of other people. It is because you choose to be unhappy. People who blame others will argue with this statement because it is uncomfortable to recognize that they are responsible for how they feel. The tendency to blame prevents people from seeing clearly what they can do to impact their lives. In terms of leading a healthy and happy life, people who blame don't believe that they have any control over their life. 2) Using "shoulds" to determine your behavior. "Shoulds" are rules you set for yourself that may be demanding and unnecessary. For example, "I should make my bed everyday or I am a lazy person." One good way of recognizing a "should" is that they usually are judgmental and you feel bad about yourself if you don't do what you think you "should," but you often feel resentful or pressured if you do it. The tendency to use "shoulds" prevent people from taking care of their needs. In terms of leading a healthy and happy live, people who "should" believe that all the "shoulds" are more important than taking care of thesmelves. Once you have honestly assessed yourself, you are in a position to challenge these irrational beliefs. If your tendency is to blame, you can tell yourself "I can impact my life. I am responsible for my health and happiness." If your tendency is to "should," you can tell yourself "It is okay and good for me to take care of my own needs. I don't have to meet unnecessary expectations." By using statements such as these whenever you catch yourself engaging in the irrational thinking, you will begin to change your thinking. Very importantly, notice that I just said whenever you catch yourself engaging in the irrational thinking. When people are trying to change their thinking, they believe they can use these statements once or twice and their thinking should miraculously change. But it takes more work than that. You probably think the irrational thoughts many times a day and to change the thinking you need to challenge the thoughts just as frequently. Once you have changed these attitudes, you then have the opportunity to discover just how powerful your mind is to impact your life. The power you have is a very natural process that is available to everyone. The ability to be healthy and happy is related to several simple techniques that are all related to relaxation, exercise, and nutrition. The interesting thing about these techniques is that research is beginning to show us how they impact us at a very basic level--our chemical processes. These processes involve everything about us: our thoughts, our emotions, and our behavior. For instance, relaxation produces the chemical norepinephrine with which low levels are implicated in depression. Also, exercise has been shown to produce another chemical known as endorphins which help with depression, anxiety, sleep, and sexual activity. Research is also showing that some foods such as bananas and turkey have proteins that help to create the chemical seratonin which helps with anxiety, sleep, and depression. All of these chemicals are natural chemicals that affect our bodily processes. And relaxation, exercise, and eating certain foods are things that we do that can affect the level and activity of the chemicals. HOW CAN I USE THIS POWER TO ENHANCE MY HEALTH AND HAPPINESS? Once you have changed your attitude and made a commitment to being healthy and happy, you can then use a variety of techniques to help. Some of the most common ones are explained here further: 1) VISUALIZATION. This is a simple process involving relaxation and visualizing. At a very basic level it may be used just to enhance mood through relaxing and imagining a very pleasant scene. However, at more advanced levels, it can also be used to enhance performance such as in a sporting event or giving a speech. I have also used it to deal with illness. If I feel myself starting to feel the effects of a virus, I will visualize my white blood cells attacking the virus. Doing such prevents me from becoming ill. Hypnosis is a form of more advanced visualization. 2) EXERCISE. A variety of exercise techniques can be used for different purposes. Aerobic exercise helps to strengthen the heart muscles and to reduce depression. Strength training helps to improve bone density and protects the body from physical strain. Yoga helps to improve flexibility and reduce anxiety. 3) MASSAGE THERAPY. The benefits of massage include relaxation, improved circulation, and enhanced mood. A variety of techniques can be used depending on the needs of the individual. Certainly, the massage therapy is a more passive technique for the individual, but it can also encourage you to take more active control of your life in other ways. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training:Teaching Self-Correction by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence." Tweet The following article is part of a series of articles that focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review. Assessing performance and correcting errors are important internal skills for the martial arts student to develop. But how does one develop this skill? To do so, the martial arts instructor needs to consciously teach skill just as he or she teaches proper execution of a side kick or using faking techniques during sparring. However, teaching the development of using internal sources of information for feedback may be something many martial arts instructors were not taught themselves. So often when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence. For effective learning to occur, the individual must receive feedback regarding performance. That feedback can be external from a teacher or videotape or a test, or it can be internal observations by the individual learner. Without feedback of some type the individual may not learn at all or may learn incorrect information. However, the problem that can occur with teaching is that feedback from the instructor regarding acceptable performance can make the student more dependent upon such feedback. Past research tended to focus primarily on the importance of external feedback; however, more recent research indicates that internal feedback can be even more important than external feedback when the student knows the skills but is working on consistently implementing correct performance. In addition, research has indicated that frequent feedback may increase the students dependence upon feedback from the instructor and that when the instructor is not present performance decreases due to the lack of reliance on the students internal sources of information. How can the martial arts instructor encourage the process within the student of developing internal methods of feedback? The first step in any type of teaching physical skills, of course, involves providing the student with a standard of correct technique and how to perform the technique. This can be given through demonstration, videotapes, written materials, or physically guiding the student through the process. Often a combination of these methods can be most effective. Once the student has learned the basic skill and is in the process of perfecting performance, the issue of teaching the student to self-correct errors becomes crucial. The following suggestions may be useful in teaching this process: 1) If the instructor notices the student reacting to an error such as through a nonverbal grimace or a verbal statement, he/she can ask the student what the student noticed and how the error can be corrected. This forces the student to focus on the internal information that was apparent to the student and to develop a plan for solving the problem. In addition, it provides the instructor a chance to assess the students internal perfectionistic demands and to help the student reframe those self-statements. 2) Teaching the martial arts student to use internal sources of feedback can be accomplished by asking the student questions regarding his/her performance prior to giving the student feedback. At first, these questions need to be very specific to help the student focus on different aspects of the performance. For instance, questions could include, Did you maintain a low stance? or Did your punch fully extend? In the case of correct assessment of performance, the instructor can indicate agreement with the students assessment. However, if the student is unaware of certain performance errors or incorrectly identifies errors, the instructor could then explain proper performance. This method allows student to become more observant and aware of their movements and performance. 3) An extension of the above process would be to have the student evaluate their performance by using a videotape or mirror as a source of feedback. However, these methods are external sources of feedback similar to an instructors feedback and shouldnt be relied upon to the exclusion of internal information sources. They can best be used as an intermediate step in teaching the student to rely more on internal cues or when the skill being assessed is more complex. Some students may be initially unaware of the internal cues and may need the assistance of the visual information. 4) By following the above procedures, the instructor is also reducing the frequency of external feedback which is replaced by greater reliance on the students internal information. However, the instructor still needs to provide encouragement by praising specific correct actions and successes. To do so, the instructor needs to provide specific information such as You are increasing the speed of your punches rather than generic Good punch. Using this type of teaching method requires more work on the instructors part and may be more difficult to implement in a group setting. However, it pays off through greater student motivation and accurate self-assessment when the instructor is not present which in the long run improves learning skills and performance. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Happiness is An Attitude If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Happiness is An Attitude by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "One of the most salient aspects I've noticed about unhappy people is that they are desperately trying to avoid negative emotions and in the process they feel miserable." Also read: The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Tweet HOW CAN WE BE HAPPY WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN? For many years when my husband and I were first together I would ask him "When are things going to get better?" We were dealing with the usual stressors that couples face: not enough time, not enough money, and the inevitable random events such as family conflict, deaths of loved ones, illnesses and injuries. In addition, for most of our early years together I was in school and struggling with the balancing of demands of advanced education, part-time work, and a family. But I had the belief that we were working towards this perfect life that one day would emerge shining a rainbow of happiness forever over us. My husband, inclined more toward the practical, just answered my question of "When are things going to get better?," with "Another six months." That answer typically pacified me for awhile because I thought I could handle any amount of stress for six months. However, a point would occur when I once again I asked my husband "When are things going to get better?" Once again, he would answer "Another six months." This scenario occurred fairly routinely for many years. However, fortunately during this time I had experiences that began to teach me about my expectations of life. In particular, when I was completing my internship at the Veterans Administration Medical Center I had the opportunity to work on the spinal cord injury unit. That experience forever changed my thinking. In particular, I was struck by the differences in attitude among the patients. My job was to psychologically evaluate each patient. Some of those I evaluated had a recent spinal cord injury and some were returning for follow-up visits. Every patient on that unit, however, had a life-changing injury. Never would they walk again and some couldn't use their hands or even needed assistance with breathing. Every one of them had sustained major changes and losses in their life. Some of them not only lost the physical use of their body, but they lost a girlfriend or wife who couldn't handle the situation, or a job that was part of their self-identity. Yet, what I noticed was that no matter what the losses were or the length of time since the injury, the patients could be divided into two categories: happy or miserable. Those who were happy reported thinking such as "Yeah, this sucks, but I still have dreams. There are still things I can do. And I'm going to focus on those things." Those who were miserable made statements such as "This is so unfair. My whole life is ruined. I will never be happy." In obtaining the life histories of the patients, I saw that those who were happy had full and active lives, they had friends and jobs and were involved in activities. Whereas those who were miserable, often did nothing but stay in bed with little social contact and had more problems with bed sores and other ailments due to the inactivity. I was informed that even though spinal cord injury in itself does not reduce life expectancy, those who gave up tended to die at earlier ages from complications. HOW IS THE ATTITUDE OF HAPPINESS A CHOICE? So, what I learned was that even though all of these people had a similar life-changing event occur, it wasn't the event that contributed to their happiness or misery, it was their reaction to the event that caused them to be happy or miserable. And, based on the comments they made, I noticed that those who were happy made a clear choice to be happy. They could often describe the precise moment or the words that they said to themselves. Not long after this experience, I started to ask my husband "When are things going to get better?" But before he could answer "Another six months" I said, "Wait. I get it. This is life isn't it?" He just smiled and said "Yes." Then I think I might have slugged him saying "You could have let me in on the secret a little sooner!" Now, every once in awhile when we are particularly stressed, we just turn to one another and say "Another six months" which gives us a laugh and allows us to put things in perspective. Since then, even though we have had much more significant stressors in our lives, I'm no longer waiting to be happy because I recognize that happiness is a choice that we make every day. Happiness is not due to the things that happen or don't happen to us. Happiness isn't due to how much money we have or the house we live in or how successful we or our children are. Happiness is present every day we choose for it to be present. Happiness is an attitude. HOW IS THE ATTITUDE OF HAPPINESS DIFFERENT FROM POSITIVE THINKING? Yet, as I read the above I recognize that I'm simplifying a complex issue. Frequently, new psychotherapy clients tell me "I've tried that positive thinking stuff and it doesn't work." When they make this statement I agree with them "You're absolutely right. Positive thinking doesn't work." I explain to them that cognitive therapy involves realistic thinking, not positive thinking. Positive thinking doesn't work because it is not realistic and we can't believe it. The first premise of developing a coping statement or a rational challenge to inaccurate thinking is that the individual must be able to accept and believe the statement at least with an intellectual understanding. If you notice in the example above of the spinal cord injury patients they didn't say "I'm grateful to have such a challenge in my life because it's teaching me so much" but they recognized their feelings about the injury "this sucks" prior to focusing on what their life still offered. The other aspect of choosing to be happy is that we still feel loss, grief, sadness and anger when events occur to us. Being happy does not preclude other emotions but includes them. Happiness is an overall attitude, a state of contentment or satisfaction, not a temporary emotion such as joy or elation. Therefore, we have the ability to be happy even when we experience these other emotions. In fact, through our full immersion in life and the emotions life brings, we can learn how to be happy. One of the most salient aspects I've noticed about unhappy people is that they are desperately trying to avoid negative emotions and in the process they feel miserable. Also, keep in mind that this article is addressing emotional states, it cannot be applied to clinical depression. Therefore, happiness is a choice to feel the emotions that result from an event, to fully grieve, but also, to recognize our ability to accept what life offers us rather than remain focused on what is taken from us. Happiness is an attitude. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Conflict in the Workplace By Brett Hart, Ph.D. "By better understanding how conflict and anger arise, and practicing handling such conflict in an assertive way, it can become far less intimidating and be an aspect of work you can learn to manage rather than have it manage you." Tweet One rarely sees David and Susan more than a few feet from each other at work. The thought of Susan increases Davids heart rate, while Susans thoughts do likewise every time David is near. The way they look into one anothers eyes tells their co-workers, You dont really belong here. Even their boss feels a bit awkward when the heat between them borders on the inappropriate. A passionate relationship beginning to bloom? No. David and Susan are two co-workers locked in what seems to be an incurable conflict at work. Their situation illustrates how conflict can affect us at our job. Conflict may not only take a toll on our physical body (as it did on Davids racing heart), but it often occupies our thoughts and causes us a great deal of emotional distress. As we saw in the situation with David and Susan, conflictual behavior impacts not only those involved in the conflict, but also those who have no part in it. As most of us spend approximately one-third of our adult lives in the workplace, conflict in this setting cant be easily dismissed as unimportant. In fact, failing to address such conflict may have implications for our non-working lives. As a result, it becomes important for each of us to understand how conflict arises in the workplace, and what steps we can take to deal with such conflict. WHAT CAUSES CONFLICT? Understanding how conflict arises at work can be very helpful for anticipating situations that may become turbulent. While it may seem, at times, that anything can start a conflict where you work, conflict typically stems from a limited number of causes. 1) Different goals. One such cause is incompatible goals between individuals or groups of individuals at work. For example, imagine a bank teller being told by the head teller that rapid service is an absolute must from this point forward, while the community relation's director instructs all employees to focus their efforts upon quality customer contact. One can imagine how quickly problems could arise between the teller and the head teller if speed is sacrificed for quality time with the customer. 2) Different values. A second source of conflict is the different personal values we bring to work. It takes very little time, for example, for employees who enjoy going to happy hour after work and those who prefer to get home to their family to begin segregating at work. Such distancing often carries with it gossiping, suspicion, and ultimately, conflict. 3) Degree of dependency. The extent to which we depend upon others to complete our work is a third factor which can contribute to conflict. Certainly, conflict would be rare if your task is to copy a report and file it, and you have your own copy machine. However, if you are waiting for someone else to make the copies and the records room is pressuring you for the report, one could see that the opportunity for conflict begins to expand. 4) Available resources. Scarce resources are a fourth source of conflict in the workplace. Whether the resource in question is office space, supplies, the boss time, or the budget fund, we all require our share in order to meet job demands. Ask yourself what happened the last time you were unable to gain access to something you needed at work. Perhaps you experienced some of the symptoms that David and Susan experienced. 5) Degree of power. The power distribution at work can be a fifth source of conflict. We have all known people who seem to wield their power in inappropriate ways. However, individuals sometimes step on others toes inadvertently as they try to complete their own tasks. In addition, some individuals or even entire departments may be viewed as providing a more valuable service to the organization than do others. In such a case, resentment can often arise, laying the foundation for conflict. 6) Predictability of policies. A final source of conflict to be addressed here is one with which most people can readily identify: unpredictable policies. Some organizations seem notorious for continually changing their policies. Others have no policies at all, or so it would seem. You may experience this in the form of regular office meetings becoming irregular, or being told that you are violating a policy which you thought you were abiding by a week ago such as the way you dress. In any case, the absence of clear policies, or policies which are continually changing, create an environment of uncertainty and subjective interpretation which can leave one feeling vulnerable and helpless. Understanding and Handling Anger by Reducing Physical Arousal Hopefully, some of the mystery surrounding why conflict occurs at work has been removed at this point. However, why each of us personally becomes angry may be a bit unclear. In a sense, we are all like cans of soda. If we get shaken or agitated and pop our top, we explode. In this case, what shakes us up is physical arousal. This may come about from being hungry, hurried, stuck in traffic, having a sore back, etc. You may know you are aroused by your rapid heartbeat, cold hands, muscle tightness, or shallow, rapid breathing. Try to become familiar with how you experience physical arousal. Some of the following techniques can be useful in reducing that arousal: 1) Breathing exercises. Take a few minutes to slow down and deepen your breathing. 2) Muscle relaxation. Tense and release your muscles. 3) Meditation/relaxation. Find a quiet room and spend a few minutes imagining a peaceful scene. 4) Exercise. take a walk on your lunch hour or break. Handling Anger by Changing Thinking The second component which is necessary for anger is known as a trigger thought. Just as pulling the tab of a shaken soda can will cause it to explode, these thoughts are sufficient to set us off once were aroused. In most cases, these thoughts fall into two categories shoulds and blamers. In the case of shoulds, we may think that things at work should be more equitable, or that a coworker should get paid back for what they did. In the case of blamers, we may view others as the cause of our current difficulties. In either case, these thoughts are irrational because they demand behavior of others that is flawless or which is in accord with only our wishes. When we allow these thoughts to go unchallenged, they can trigger our anger towards others. As a result, it is important to work on recognizing these irrational thoughts and challenge them. Listed below are a couple of ideas to help you with this: 1) Examine your thoughts. Write out your thoughts when you are angry and ask yourself if they are rational. 2) Talk to someone. Talk to a trusted friend about your thoughts and solicit their feedback. Handling a Conflict Situation Of course, some conflicts at work simply require you to confront an individual. The most effective way for you to meet the needs you have is to use what is known as an assertive approach, rather than an aggressive or passive approach. Being assertive does require effort and practice, but most find it to be extremely helpful in addressing their needs. Below are some points you may find helpful when you practice and eventually confront an individual: 1) Make a plan. Think ahead about what it is you want to address. 2) Request a time. Set a time to talk with the individual. 3) Stay focused. Deal with one and only one topic at a time. 4) Be specific. Be brief and specific. 5) Focus on changeable behavior. Phrase your complaint as a specific behavior which the person can recognize and work toward changing (e.g. I would like you to arrive to work on time, rather than, I would like you to be more conscientious.) In the end it can often seem easier to simply avoid conflict than confront it. However, this approach will not satisfy the needs you have to make your workplace a productive and pleasant environment. By better understanding how conflict and anger arise, and practicing handling such conflict in an assertive way, it can become far less intimidating and be an aspect of work you can learn to manage rather than have it manage you. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 5 Common Microaggressions Against Those With Mental Illness by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Microaggressions are subtle behaviors or reactions that diminish the recipient in some way." Tweet Those struggling with mental illness often report that others don't understand the problems they experience. In addition, others treat them differently in very subtle ways but that are clearly apparent to the individual with mental illness. Not only that, but when those with mental illness complain, they are ignored, their mental illness is blamed, or they are told they are imagining the problem due to excessive sensitivity. Although overt discrimination such as occupational inequities has been opposed through legislation such as the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), these types of microaggressions still plague those with mental illness. Microaggressions are subtle behaviors or reactions that diminish the recipient in some way. The problem with microaggressions, similar to indirect passive-aggressive behavior, is the behavior is often so subtle that the perpetrator can easily deny the intention or even blame the recipient. Sometimes the perpetrator may even be unaware of their underlying attitudes that are being expressed in this subtle manner. However, the recipient is very much aware of the difference in how they are treated. Through interviewing individuals with mental illness, researchers Gonzales and colleagues (2014) found five themes of microaggressions against those with mental illness: 1) Invalidation Many people with mental illness report that others tend to dismiss their illness or symptoms through minimizing their experience, symptomizing their normal experiences, and patronizing. All of these behaviors show a lack of education and/or understanding of the mental illness. Minimizing. Often others will minimize the symptoms someone experiences such as believing that because they can function in certain ways the mental illness must not be severe. Frequently, when I've had clients who needed to take a leave of absence from work, they are afraid to be seen in public because others will think they are just playing hooky from work. I saw her shopping at the mall. She could work! or He was out riding a bike. I don't think there's anything wrong with him! However, with depression or anxiety a person might look fine on the outside but the pain they're suffering can't be seen. For instance, the treatment for depression is to do normal activities they would usually enjoy but are avoiding, so it actually may be quite hard for them to be in the mall or riding a bike. Yet, if they isolate themselves in their home (or a room) the depression is less likely to improve. A proper response if you see someone who is depressed but doing a pleasant activity is: It's so good to see you out! I know it must be hard. Also, certain triggers could be causing the problem. For instance, that person shopping at the mall may be having a panic attack but is trying to face the anxiety of being around others so that she can return to work. The fear of others minimizing their problems can often prevent people with mental illness from doing the treatment methods that can help them get better. In this instance, not only is she worried about having a panic attack but then she has to be concerned about what others might think. Even other people with mental illness may not understand and tend to minimize the problem if it is not the same as what they experience. You can't really be depressed if you are able to work. I couldn't get out of bed or take a shower when I was depressed! Mental illnesses present in many different ways and just because it might have the same name doesn't mean it will be the same experience. Symptomizing. Sometimes others will over-interpret normal emotions when someone has mental illness. This can be particularly confusing because it can seem like genuine concern but still leaves the individual feeling frustrated and even doubtful of their own emotions. For example, someone with depression is grieving the loss of their pet and is cautioned, You better see your doctor about your depression because it is getting worse. Or, someone with an anxiety disorder is nervous because of a normal situation such as an upcoming job interview might be told Oh, no, you're feeling anxious again! Maybe you shouldn't do this interview. Patronizing. Sometimes others try to show genuine support but it may appear to be condescending. For the individual with mental illness, it can be unclear whether they are truly trying to be supportive or if it is intended as a put-down. You are really brave to speak up about your mental illness and not be worried others will see you as weak. Such a statement could be a back-handed (passive-aggressive) compliment indicating an underlying view of mental illness as weakness. 2) Assumption of Inferiority Most people with mental illness have experienced directly or indirectly the attitude that those with mental illness are inferior to others. Again, this shows a lack of understanding of mental illness. Do we think someone with cancer is inferior to others? No, we see that person as a normal person with an illness. Mental illness should be thought of in the same way. It does not mean the person is inferior. In fact, as I tell clients, they have to deal with all the ordinary problems of life AND manage the symptoms of mental illness. That takes a great deal of strength. Assumption of lower intelligence. Many times if others know that someone has mental illness, they will be more solicitous as if they are speaking to someone who has lower intelligence. I've even had clients who reported their health professionals will speak to them as if they were a childvery slowly and deliberately. Or, may convey a sense of irritation with someone who is anxious, This is a simple procedure! I would be done already if you would stop asking questions! Of course, this type of response only makes the anxiety worse. It would be better to say, I know you are anxious. I'll take my time and coach you through it. Assumption of incompetence. People with mental illness may be treated as if they are less competent than others. For instance, they may be given work duties that are below their capability: We don't want to overly stress you. Although the intention may be to aid the person on the work site, it should be determined by the individual with the mental illness (and their mental health professionals) what they can handle and not handle. Assumption of not having control. Sometimes others will assume that an individual with mental illness doesn't have the control to function normally. Unfortunately, the most severe cases of mental illness are often most publicized which give people the impression that everyone with mental illness is unable to control their behavior and are unable to participate normally in society. However, the truth is that most people with mental illness wouldn't even be recognized by others as having a problem unless they shared their experience with others. In fact, many focus on over controlling the mental illness to the extent that it may be harmful for them. For example, a person with depression may work extra hours at work even though other employees refuse to do so because the individual doesn't want to be seen as weak and controlled by the depression. However, this fear prevents that person from taking good care of him or herself and managing stress that could make the depression worse. 3) Fear of Mental Illness Some people fear those with mental illness because they believe they may be dangerous or unpredictable. Again, the media tends to play up these notions by the focus on mental illness when crimes have been committed. However, the impression that is created is quite wrong. Only a very tiny percentage of people with mental illness are dangerous or commit crimes. In fact, there are many more crimes committed by people who are not considered mentally ill. As a result of this fear, however, people with mental illness are often shunned or isolated. Unfortunately, such a reaction can cause a worsening of the illness, and for those who may be predisposed to violence, it may contribute to causing the violent reaction. If, as a society, we treated people with mental illness better, we would likely have fewer violent reactions. It is important to think of violence as the interaction of the illness and the environment but not necessarily caused by the illness. In fact, if we could truly recognize that it takes a village we could solve many of the problems with mental illness because the problems aren't due to the mental illness but due to how we treat those with mental illness. For instance, the town of Geel, in Belgium, has been taking in those with schizophrenia for over 700 years. Instead of treating them as sick or crazy, they have made them valued members of the community. This model has been very effective in helping those with schizophrenia function in productive ways. 4) Shaming of Mental Illness Due to others' responses, those with mental illness often feel others see them as weak or that they should hide their mental illness. Telling them they shouldn't let others know about their mental illness implies something is terribly shameful about mental illness. Making them feel bad about their reactions only makes the situation worse: Get ahold of yourself! In addition, this attitude continues to perpetrate the stigma. As long as the only people who are in the public eye with mental illness are those who are so dysfunctional that they are immediately apparent, then the public continues to believe the myths about mental illness. The public needs to become more aware of the many faces of mental illness because those faces are 1 in 3 of your family and friends. I think that the new reality TV fad of using mental illness as entertainment only contributes to this stigma. I understand some people say they are trying to bring attention to the problems. However, when the conversation around the water cooler is Did you see the show where the hoarder had only a tiny path to move through his home and was even saving bottles of his urine? the stigma is reinforced by making everyone with mental illness seem odd and very different from others. 5) Second Class Citizen Attitudes Many people with mental illness report being treated as if they don't have the same rights as the dominant (re: normal) group of society. Their opinions are ignored as if they were children and not taken into account when making decisions that will affect them. It is as if the normals think We need to take care of them which may have a good intention but it results in controlling other human beings capable of decision-making. When anyone, even a mental health professional, believes they know what is best for an individual with mental illness, they may not only be wrong but even potentially harmful to the individual. For instance, those with mental illness know themselves and their reactions better than anyone else. However, frequently they are told they are wrong when they experience an undesirable effect from medication. In this case, the medical professional assumes they know what is best. Or, an individual might be told they have to think in a different way to be acceptable to society. In my practice, I try to validate how people think, yet provide them with an understanding of how that thinking might affect them or their relationships. By doing so, it provides them with a choice. This is how we treat adults in our society--not by telling them what they should do but helping them examine their options. What Can You Do About Microaggressions? 1) Education. Recognize that microaggressions are often not intentional but are due to a lack of education. When you observe a microaggression, try to educate the person (or the public) about how it impacts someone with mental illness. Even if you believe the behavior is intentional, try to give the person the benefit of the doubt and provide education as a first step. Unfortunately, even if people aren't intentional in their behavior, they may still react defensively. People don't like to be told they are acting in insensitive ways. Therefore, be careful how you approach someone. For instance, instead of saying You're shaming me! say You might not be aware of this, but when you say I should hide my mental illness, it feels as if I should be ashamed of being mentally ill. 2) Don't personalize. If you discover that someone does have harsh beliefs about mental illness such as believing that you are weak or inferior in some way, recognize that it is not about you. For whatever reason, this person has bigoted beliefs and is not receptive to education, but it doesn't mean such beliefs are truth. Don't doubt yourself just because of someone's demeaning attitudes. It is best to try to dissociate from such people as much as possible and establish relationships with those who are more understanding. 3) Advocacy. If microaggressions are part of an institution, work towards changing the institution. For instance, if a treatment program for mental illness takes away your choice unnecessarily in a way they wouldn't do for those requiring physical treatment, inform them of the discrepancy and how changes could be made. References Gonzales, L., Davidoff, K. C., Nadal, K. L., & Yanos, P. T. (2014, November 17). Microaggressions Experienced by Persons With Mental Illnesses: An Exploratory Study. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal. Advance online publication. DOI: 10/1037/prj0000096 Copyright 2015 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Motivation and Goal-Setting Articles GUIDE TO HOW TO SET ACHIEVABLE GOALS Describes steps to help set realistic goals and how to follow through. SETTING GOALS TO MAXIMIZE PERFORMANCE Discusses how to set athletic goals to achieve maximum performance. MOTIVATION: INTRINSIC VS. EXTRINSIC How to develop internal motivation based upon your own goals. EXCELLENCE VS. PERFECTION Striving for excellence involves setting realistic, achievable goals rather than perfectionistic demands. FEEDBACK, SELF-EFFICACY, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOTOR SKILLS How to teach to increase internal motivation for developing physical skills. GIVING WOMEN FEEDBACK TO INCREASE SELF-EFFICACY Improving self-efficacy increases internal motivation. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles To Should? Or, Not To Should? Demand Thinking by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "One major problem with demand thinking is that it creates a great deal of unnecessary stress." Tweet Angie expected that she should never hurt people's feelings. Obviously, this thinking is unrealistic because just in process of living we hurt other people's feelings. Without intention of hurting someone, we can still hurt their feelings by being better than them at something, or because we have something they don\'t, or because we can't do what they want. So this type of should is impossible to achieve which causes Angie to feel guilty because she\'s not able to meet her expectation. Robert believes that he should be perfect in his work. Any error is unacceptable and means that he wasn't being diligent enough. He criticized himself endlessly even for tiny mistakes. Fear of making mistakes ruled his life to such a degree that he tended to take excessive time completing his work. Eventually he was fired because he wasn't as efficient as the other employees who actually make more mistakes. He saw this as unfair because he was the best employee they had. Certainly, according to his criteria, he may have been best but his employer was losing money due to his inefficiency. Jerry believed that his wife should work her schedule around his. She could only visit with her family if he didn't have other plans. He even believed that she should have the same sleep schedule as his although she tended to be most productive at night rather than in the morning like him. As you see from these examples, demand thinking is engaging in unnecessary or unrealistic expectations about behavior. When the demand thinking is focused on the present or the future, we refer to the thinking as shoulds. When it is focused on the past, it typically takes the form of blaming either yourself or others. Demand thinking causes several problems. Foremost, such thinking tends to create or increase stress unnecessarily. In addition, it may contribute to perfectionism, compulsive time-consuming and inefficient behavior. Finally, when directed at others it tends to cause conflict in relationships or resentment towards others. FIXED DESIRE VS. DESIRE I often encourage my clients to either change the demand thinking into a desire or to get rid of it. For example, a person may have the belief I should make my bed everyday. Changing this belief to a desire becomes I like to make my bed because I enjoy how my bedroom looks when it is made. Notice the difference in this thinking. Even just changing the wording tends to reduce the pressure or stress. However, the idea is not to just change the wording but to also change the intent. For example, I prefer to make my bed everyday, but if I don't, that's okay. this conveys a different approach than If I don't make my bed everyday, I'm just lazy. Notice that this example is combining a negative label (lazy) with the demand which often occurs with shoulds or blaming. The other alternative is to eliminate the demand thinking. So instead of believing I should make my bed everyday the self-talk can become I can make my bed if I want to, but if I don't it doesn't make me a lazy person. It is a personal choice and I don't need to stress myself about it. Sometimes clients will argue with me But I should! Frequently people believe this even with something as simple as making the bed. And, if that's the case, imagine all the other shoulds ruling the person's life. When people argue about the shoulds, I try to help them put the should into perspective. For example, I might ask When you die, are people going to say 'She made her bed everyday'? This allows people to examine how important the belief is. Demand thinking is not about morals, laws or ethics. In these cases, we don't try to change the thinking because it is necessary and realistic. So we should obey the laws, for example. However, many people will convince themselves that their should are based on morals or other demands of the world. For example, the adage Cleanliness is next to Godliness is making a should into an issue of morality. THE STRESS OF DEMAND THINKING When there is no desire, all things are at peace. Tao Te Ching One major problem with demand thinking is that it creates a great deal of unnecessary stress. For instance, if you believe I should complete this work project by the end of the day you will feel stressed if anything disrupts your plans. However, thinking I will complete what I can to the best of my ability you are not likely to feel as stressed if someone suddenly needs your time elsewhere. The perfectionistic demands are particularly stressful because they are so impossible to achieve. We cannot be perfect, therefore we will always fall short of our expectation. The emotional stress of failure will be constantly present. Even if we have the ability to be perfect, we always have limited resources. We only have so many hours in the day. We only have a certain amount of energy. We only have a certain amount of money. Other demands will use our resources. The bottom line is that we truly can only do the best we can with the resources we have. Blaming Another aspect of demand thinking is when we focus it on other people. Blaming others is usually due to shoulds that we have for other people. You should have remembered that appointment we had scheduled! Now you made me late. People who demand perfection in themselves are likely to demand it in others. Sometimes this is very subtle. A parent might say, I don't expect my child to get perfect grades. However, a look of disappointment may flash across their face when they look at the report card. This is an example of how non-verbal communication may be more powerful than what we actually say. CHANGING DEMAND THINKING 1) Recognize the Should. Try to be aware of your expectations. You can do this initially by listening to the words you use. However, not every should is really a should. So you also need to become aware of the intent. Is there an underlying demand to the should? 2) Eliminate the Should. Can you convince yourself that this expectation is unnecessary? In a situation when a wife expects her husband to know what she wants without having to ask, she could recognize that such a demand is unreasonable: He really shouldn't have to know what I want without me telling him. I need to express my needs. 3) Change Should to a Desire. Recognize that you might like to accomplish or achieve something but you don't have to. In other words, it would be nice if something occurred but it is not necessary. I would like to finish this assignment today, but I still have time tomorrow. 4) Challenge the Shoulds. The more repetition of the challenging thoughts, the more effective cognitive therapy is. Continue to remind yourself as frequently as possible that these are unreasonable demands and change the wording of how you talk to yourself. 5) Cognitive Diary. One way of working on this is using the cognitive diary tool to examine and challenge your thinking. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles "...many disagreements create a spiral of conflict rather than cooperation. Each side is focused more on proving rightness than on resolving the problem...As an experiment, for a couple weeks try to truly understand others' opinions and positions without defending your own." What if You Considered Other Peoples' Views? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet No, that can't be right vs. Really? Why is that? I think that's wrong vs. What do you think? That's stupid! vs. That's interestingtell me more. No, you don't understand vs. Why do you think that? The Tendency to Defend Opinions The first reaction many people have to a difference of opinion, values, or perspective is to focus on defending their own viewpoint. Whether the conflict occurs in a relationship, in a social or work group, or even between countries, the initial reaction is I'm right and the other person must be mistaken. Interestingly, though, people who are considered brilliant conversationalists and who appeal to others are those who show an interest in other people. Instead of insisting upon others hearing their viewpoint, they listen to others. And they don't just silently listen but they actively listen. In other words, they show interest, ask questions, and make comments related to the other person's statements. On the other hand, fiercely defending an opinion is often viewed by the other person as belittling their position. Sometimes defending a position is overtly derogatory by suggesting the other person is biased, self-serving in some way, or woefully misinformed. As a result, many disagreements create a spiral of conflict rather than cooperation. Each side is focused more on proving rightness than on resolving the problem. The pressure to conform to views occurs even more strongly when a person is part of a group than when they are not. For instance, a family may expect other family members to agree with their views or be subject to ridicule, criticism, or hostility. This is often referred to as the black sheep effect (Sammut, et al., 2015). Similarly, in businesses, people who often voice opposing views are not considered team players. Yet, important change can often be affected by those who voice unpopular views. For instance, in the field of psychotherapy back in the 1950s, a researcher, Hans Eysenck, reviewed the literature and stated that psychotherapy was less effective than doing nothing because most problems cleared up within two years on their own for 2/3's of people. His viewpoint created a firestorm of controversy among psychotherapists. However, by bringing attention to the issue, he forced psychotherapy research to focus on developing more scientifically rigorous therapies. Instead of therapy based on the therapist's opinion, the criteria for effective and ethical therapy changed to methods supported by research evidence. To effectively resolve conflict, it is necessary to overcome the tendency to see others as wrong or morally challenged. The initial reaction to Eysenck was to show that he was wrong. However, eventually, the mental health field listened to him and began to develop therapies that were based on the criteria that therapy needed to be more effective than doing nothing. In other words, therapy needed to show success in less than two years or needed to help more than 72% of people. Sources of Bias More recent research shows that even though therapists may learn the scientifically-based treatments, they still tend to believe that something unique in their methods are the causes of change in clients. These researchers concluded there are several reasons for this bias (Lilienfeld et al., 2014). Such reasons seem to be the same biases why people often believe their viewpoint is the correct one. 1) Commonsense bias. This bias is the tendency to believe the world exists in the way we see it and disregard other information. Often, these beliefs are expressed by This is what worked for me, which may be true but it is presented as if it is the only truth for everyone. I often hear people in the media ridiculing the need for certain research: Why did they need to spend the money on that? That's commonsense! True, sometimes the outcome of the research is the same as what commonsense tells us, but sometimes it is not. The only way to know if commonsense is accurate is through research. Yet, often when research shows commonsense to be inaccurate, many people, even educated people, hold to their viewpoint. This even occurs when presented with data that may show they are wrong: There must be something wrong with the data! 2) Seeking confirming information bias. Referred to in the psychological literature as confirmation bias is the tendency to only seek information that is consistent with your own beliefs. Opposing information is dismissed, ignored, or distorted. As a result, you strengthen your beliefs by ignoring other information. People want to hear what they want to hear. How often during the current presidential election cycle do you wonder How can people believe that candidate? Due to this confirmation bias, they believe a candidate because they ignore opposing information by claiming it is faulty in some way. 3) Conclusions bias. Illusory causation is the psychological term referring to the tendency to see cause from our own perspective. As a result, we may develop inaccurate conclusions of cause. Just because one thing follows another does not mean the first thing caused the second. Or, just because you intended to affect something does not mean you were the cause of the outcome. Such a bias is an illusion of control, believing we have more power than we do. For instance, if I, as a therapist, use a treatment procedure to help reduce anxiety and the person gets better I am likely to attribute their improvement to my treatment. However, that perspective may not always be accurate. Often enough in my years of therapy I have seen that it may not be my carefully crafted techniques but some other factor that caused the improvement. Frequently clients have referred to some comment I made as having made such a difference for them and I would realize that it was an offhand comment I made while walking to the door at the end of therapy not intending to be therapeutic. Use Active Listening to Overcome These Biases Think of the last conflict you had with someone. How much did you truly listen to the other person vs. trying to make your point? How open were you to considering another point of view? If not, why was that? What were your concerns? If you considered their viewpoint, how much impact would it have on your life? Would your life be adversely affected in any way? If not, why not listen fully? What can be the harm in listening to someone? Many times people defend their viewpoint for self-satisfaction alone, for the purpose of boosting their ego by showing they are right. However, listening doesn't mean you have to accept the other's position and change your own. It only means being considerate of another person's opinions, values, and beliefs. It might mean accepting that others can have valid reasons for their positions as well. Instead, be open to understanding the differences in your viewpoint and the other person's. Sometimes, by listening you might find that you misunderstood. Other times just by clearly understanding the other person you might find that you are not completely in disagreement and can find some common ground. Finally, once the other person feels understood, he or she may be more willing to listen to your position. Certainly, if the conflict involves engaging in a behavior that could harm you or others, you may need to defend your position strongly. However, much conflict doesn't involve such circumstances. Generally, it means just listening to someone and validating that you heard and understood their viewpoint. The best way to do this is through active listening. Instead of silently listening to someone (while thinking about how they are wrong), show interest by fully attending to them. By doing so, it becomes easier to ask them to listen to your position. And when you have two people listening to one another rather than stubbornly defending a position more can be accomplished. Active listening involves several components: 1) Ask questions. When people have disagreements they are often focused on their own response. Rather than trying to defend your position, try to fully understand their position. The best way to do this is by asking questions. To ask a question, you need to first listen to what they are saying so that you can frame the question. In addition, the question needs to show genuine interest in the topic. Many people will try to phrase a question to express their own viewpoint or to put a person on the spot such as What is your data for that? or How do you know that? Instead, ask questions that allow the other person to fully express their position. For example, your mother-in-law gives you unsolicited advice on child-rearing: You shouldn't let him spend so much time playing video games! He needs to be active and outside. What is your first reaction? Probably to bristle at the criticism and think, Why can't she mind her own business? She wasn't that great of a mother herself. However, what would happen if you just listened to her viewpoint? What about showing interest by asking questions? Maybe even agreeing. I'm sure you're right. I find it hard to get him to do anything else without a lot of conflict. He just wears me down. What did you do when your children were difficult? In this way, you change the interaction from one of competition (proving who is the better mother) to one of cooperationif your mother-in-law has good intentions. 2) Paraphrase. When listening to someone else, repeat back to them what you understand about what they are saying. This not only shows that you are paying attention, but it allows them to clarify their position. Although paraphrasing is helpful with any kind of discussion, it can be particularly useful when disagreements occur. Most arguments degrade into sound bites which don't permit a full understanding of the issue. Instead of listening, most people will interrupt with their response. Paraphrasing and fully understanding the person's position can help the argument be resolved more easily. What you're saying is... I understand you to mean...is that correct? If I'm understanding you correctly, you mean... 3) Attentive body language. Show consideration and respect through your body language. Sometimes people will listen without really paying attention to the other. Certain body language will imply lack of interest such as poor eye contact, rolling eyes, jaw and/or fist tightening, defensive positioning such as folding arms or turning away from the other person. Such body language tells the other person you are not truly listening. Active listening includes an open body posture so that you are facing the other person without tension. Maintaining good eye contact with appropriate head nodding also shows interest. Tone of voice can convey a great deal so be sure to use a tone that indicates interest instead of sarcasm. Why do you think that? can be said with a tone that indicates interest in the why or it can be said with sarcasm: Why do you think THAT?! In summary, it doesn't hurt you to show an interest in others' opinions and it may give you greater understanding why they believe the way they do. Sometimes it can solve a problem or improve a relationship. And, if nothing else, you may learn something. As an experiment, for a couple weeks try to truly understand others' opinions and positions without defending your own. Lilienfeld, S.O., Ritschel, L.A., Lynn, S.J., Cautin, R.L. and Latzman, R.D. (2014). Why Ineffective Psychotherapies Appear to Work: A Taxonomy of Causes of Spurious Therapeutic Effectiveness. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9, 355387. DOI: 10.1177/1745691614535216 Sammut, G., Bezzina, F. and Sartawi, M. (2015). The Spiral of Conflict: Nave Realism and the Black Sheep Effect in Attributions of Knowledge and Ignorance. Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, 21, 289294. DOI: 10.1037/pac0000098 Copyright 2016 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions--page 1 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Happiness is not something you achieve. In fact, the more you try to find happiness, the less likely you will be happy. Happiness occurs by how you live your life." Tweet SUGGESTION 1: USING THE SUGGESTIONS The following is a list of 50 suggestions to help you focus on using the cognitive-behavioral therapy(CBT) methods to create the conditions for happiness, a frequently elusive but fairly simple feat when happiness is truly understood. Happiness is not something you achieve. In fact, the more you try to find happiness, the less likely you will be happy. Happiness occurs by how you live your life. Certain lifestyle practices have been shown to be associated with increased happiness. It may be difficult initially to incorporate the lifestyle practices into your daily routine, but the more you do so, the more opportunity you create for happiness to find you. For those of you with Android devices, the Excel At Life's Happy Habits can assist you with developing the lifestyle practices. However, those without an Android device can still use these same methods. All the audios are included on this website and the assessment will be as well. The following list of suggestions are things you can do to help you learn to develop these lifestyle practices as well as to identify obstacles to your happiness and provide you with tools to address those obstacles. Some of the suggestions are simpler and some are more involved. It is better to start with something simple that you feel fairly certain you can achieve. That way you are less likely to feel discouraged. Not all the suggestions are relevant for all people. So, review the list, read the detailed descriptions, and choose what is most likely to work for you. As you review the suggestion list you may find that you are already doing some of the suggestions. However, you may not be giving yourself credit for the positive or healthy things you do for yourself. Keeping track of the positive things can help you focus in a different way. The Happiness Journal included in the app allows you to develop a list of affirmations and positive events which you can review to help you stay positively focused. In addition, the suggestion list is customizable so that if you are using a method that is helping you with creating happiness and want that included in your list, you can add it. Too often, people focus on what they are not doing rather than reinforcing themselves for what they have accomplished. In cognitive therapy, we see that helping people to focus on accomplishments rather than failure helps to break the cycle. When making changes, it doesn't matter how small the accomplishment. It only matters that you are moving in a positive direction. This app includes a points feature to help you give yourself credit for the different suggestions that you try each day. You can keep a daily total of the different suggestions you use. This is to help you focus on what you are doing rather than on what you are not doing. Don't try to do everything at once. Just see if you can increase the following practices little by little. The points feature in the app allows you to check the things you do each day and to view a graph of your progress over time. See if you can increase your number of points each day! Read more...page 2 Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Effects of Intensity on Performance by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...competitors need an optimal level of intensity. This means that when intensity is too high or too low, performance can be affected." Tweet My worst fear when competing in martial arts kata competition was my mind going blank and forgetting my routine. I was afraid of embarrassing myself in front of the judges and audience. One day it happened. I had just learned a new routine, I was anxious about performing it, and I went blank. So anxious I couldn't even make up some moves, I had to ask the judges if I could begin again which is something a performer is never supposed to do. But at that point it was my only option unless I just quit completely. The problem I experienced is one that many athletes experience when their intensity level becomes too high. My intensity level was high because I was probably thinking, What if I forget this new routine? That would be awful! What will everyone think of me? One of the most common ways that intensity can interfere is when skills require a great deal of mental concentration. Generally, it is believed that competitors need an optimal level of intensity. This means that when intensity is too high or too low, performance can be affected. A high intensity level can decrease concentration, focus, and create problems with coordination, reaction time, strength, and endurance. A low intensity level can decrease energy, reduce interest and motivation, and reduce focus. WHAT IS INTENSITY? Sport psychologists prefer to use the neutral term intensity rather than the positive term energy or the negative terms tension or anxiety. The reason for this is that intensity can affect different competitors variously. For some it positively influences their performance whereas for others it has a negative impact. Therefore, it is important to understand the individual's reaction to intensity. The best way to understand intensity is that it is a physiological reaction to the competitive situation. We experience physical symptoms that can either help us or hinder us. Sometimes this can vary with the individual, other times it varies with the sport or the situation. Also, some physical symptoms such as a high energy level create problems in situations where quiet calmness may be necessary. 1) Positive Intensity. The increase in adrenalin, energy, heart rate, blood flow, and muscle tension may be experienced as a positive factor by many competitors. These physiological changes may increase confidence, determination, and prepare them to meet the physical challenge. A high level of physiological intensity improves the outcome of their competition especially when it is a sport or position requiring a great deal of physical activity such as a snowboarder or a linebacker. 2) Negative Intensity. However, some of these same physical sensations can impact performance if the situation requires a great deal of concentration or accuracy such as golf or a performance sport. The increased adrenalin, heart rate, and muscle tension may actually interfere with performance. In addition, when intensity becomes too high a person might feel increased fatigue instead of energy which can cause slower reactions and reduced coordination. Increased intensity can also contribute to increased negativity, fear, anxiety, and feelings of hopelessness which interfere with performance of physical skills. INFLUENCES ON INTENSITY LEVEL 1) Perception of Intensity. Sometimes two different competitors can experience the same physical sensation but interpret it in different ways. Physical agitation, increased heart rate/respiration could be viewed as I'm revved up and ready to go! or I'm nervous. I don't know if I can do this. Perception can create a self-fulfilling prophecy. The person with the positive interpretation is more likely to manage the intensity successfully whereas the person with the negative interpretation is likely to intensify the physical symptoms until they are overwhelming and interfere with performance. 2) Complexity of the Task. If the competitive task requires greater focus, attention to detail, decision-making, and fine motor control, it typically requires a lower level of intensity to think more clearly and respond more precisely. Whereas, a higher intensity is necessary if the task requires a great deal of energy, endurance, speed, or quick reaction without precise decision-making. 3) Demands. Most people have a lower intensity level during practice than they do during competitive events because they are not as concerned with the outcome during practice. Therefore, practice does not have as much demand regarding outcome. Not only does competition typically have more demand, certain types of competition may have greater demand. For instance, traditionally rival teams may experience greater demand than a competition in which there has been no long-term rivalry. However, sometimes practice sessions can have certain demand characteristics depending upon the situation. For example, if an athlete has a new coach he/she wants to impress. Some athletes will try to create demand characteristics during practice so as to simulate competition conditions. EFFECTS OF INTENSITY LEVELS 1) Over-intensity. When a competitor's intensity is too great, a number of different internal and physical effects occur. A decrease in focus often occurs. The competitor is more distractible or more internally focus on negative or unproductive thoughts such as fearfulness. Frequently, these thoughts can lead to decreased motivation. Physical sensations can include nervousness, muscular tension, gastro-intestinal distress, respiratory problems, and fatigue. Many of these symptoms can directly affect performance such as rapid breathing can interfere with the necessary balance of oxygen in the system. Or symptoms such as shaking or muscular tension can affect coordination and reaction time. 2) Under-intensity. Sometimes competitors can have levels of physical activation that are too low such as heart rate and energy level. They may even feel lethargic. Such sensations can interfere with focus and reaction time as well as decrease the competitor's motivation to try. 3) Optimal Level of Intensity. Research shows that each competitor may have a sweet spot for performance when the intensity level is high enough that they are motivated but not too high as to create a negative reaction that can impact performance. This optimal level of intensity may vary with each competitor, each sport or position played, and the type of event. Therefore, it is important for the competitor to learn how to analyze his/her performance so as to prepare for events effectively. The statistical analysis in the SportPsych app by Excel At Life helps to do this. WHAT CAUSES OVER-INTENSITY? 1) Requirements of the Situation. Some events may require more of a competitor than others in order to be successful. For instance, a local event may not have as many highly skilled competitors as a regional or national event. My 8-year-old granddaughter has already learned that she is more likely to win if she attends smaller karate competitions. 2) Are the Requirements Manageable? The less confident the competitor is about his or her ability to meet the requirements of the situation, the more likely he or she will experience over-intensity. The perception that the requirements are within the skill level of the competitor, the more likely the intensity level will be in the optimal level of performance. 3) Consequences of Not Meeting the Requirements. Each situation may have a variety of potential consequences, negative and positive. Many of these consequences can be self-imposed such as the athlete's need to prove him or herself to achieve respect from others. Or, the example I provided earlier in which I was fearful of being embarrassed. However, consequences can also be imposed by others such as teammates expecting an athlete to perform at a certain level, and if that doesn't occur, they may be angry. Or, a parent who punishes a child if they don't perform well enough. In addition, consequences can be imposed by other factors such as a person needing to win due to the financial impact that would be caused by losing. 4) The Importance of the Consequences. If an athlete believes that the consequences will not seriously impact his or her life or that he/she is capable of handling the consequences, the less likely the intensity level will be too high. For example, after my performance in which my mind went blank and I forgot my routine, I no longer had the fear of embarrassment because I was able to tell myself Been there. Done that. Didn't die...So it doesn't matter. In other words, I learned that the consequences of forgetting my performance were manageable. WHAT CAUSES UNDER-INTENSITY? 1) Over-confidence. If a competitor feels too confident about the event, he or she may not be able to increase the intensity enough to achieve the optimal level of intensity. As a result, the lowered energy and focus may contribute to a poor performance. 2) Lack of Interest. If a competitor is not interested in the event or doesn't care about the outcome, he or she will have greater difficulty motivating to perform well. For example, a child who is competing just to please a parent may not have any personal motivation to strive for success. 3) Over-training. Sometimes over-training will cause changes such as physical or mental fatigue. The competitor may be so worn-out from the training that the body is physically stressed and conditioning decreases. As a result, they are not able to achieve the necessary level of intensity. HOW TO ACHIEVE THE OPTIMAL LEVEL OF INTENSITY 1) Develop an Awareness of Intensity Effects. Each competitor can be affected differently by intensity level and even the same competitor may need a different intensity level depending upon the sport or situation. Therefore, it is necessary for the competitor to develop an awareness of how he or she is is affected by the intensity level as well as when it has a positive effect and when it has a negative effect. A good way to do this is to keep a journal of events and record level of intensity and satisfaction with performance. With enough information over time, the competitor may then examine the journal for patterns. You can ask yourself questions such as: What was I feeling physically? What was I thinking? What demands did I experience from myself or others? What aspects of the event influenced me? What was the level of competition? The SportPsych app gives an easier way of doing this. Once you have recorded enough journal entries, you will be able to obtain a statistical evaluation of your performances. By obtaining a correlation between your satisfaction and your intensity level, you will have a better idea of what is your optimal level of intensity. Do the successful performances occur with a higher intensity level or a lower intensity level? In addition, you can record other information in the Comments section so that you can examine your performances for patterns. For example, what was your diet like prior to your successful performances? How much sleep did you obtain? Did you stay up late drinking? What was your stress level like? 2) Modifying the Intensity Level Once you know what your optimal level of intensity is, you can then assess your intensity level with each event and determine whether you need to increase it or decrease it. Following are some of the methods used to change the intensity level. Recognizing Negative Thinking Understanding the thinking that contributes to your intensity level allows you to challenge or change the negative self-talk. This can assist with both over-intensity and under-intensity. Increase Motivational Self-Talk By developing some statements that are encouraging, you can modify your intensity level. The statements need to be focused specifically to either over-intensity or under-intensity. For example, to increase intensity you might say Can't is not a word in my vocabulary. Success is based on effort. I need to try, not just depend on luck. To decrease intensity you might say I can handle this. I prefer to win, but I don't need to win. Strive for excellence, not perfection. The SportPsych Performance Coach app provides a list of motivational statements you can choose and modify to fit your needs. Increase Familiarity To reduce intensity it is often helpful to become more familiar with the situation. For instance, watching training videos showing an event can help you become more familiar. Showing up early to an event can help you become more accustomed to the surroundings. Preparation for the Unexpected Many competitors who are physically and mentally prepared for an event may become disoriented by the unexpected or by uncontrollable events. Frequently, it is useful to have a plan for these situations. Although you obviously can't plan for specific unexpected events, you can plan how to handle such situations generally. For instance, you can have methods to calm yourself when uncontrollable but distressing events occur. Or, you can have methods to re-focus yourself when you become distracted by the unexpected. Reduce Physiological Intensity Various methods can help to reduce the physical symptoms of over-intensity such as breathing, muscle relaxation, imagery, relaxing music, qi gong or yoga. However, you can't use them for the first time during a competition. You need to determine which methods work best for you and then practice those methods until they are second-nature to you similar to your physical skills. Increase Energy. To manage under-intensity, you may need to engage in activities that will increase your physical sensation of energy. Such methods can include physical activity, self-talk, imagery, or energizing and motivational music. Pre-competitive Routines. Have some methods that you can incorporate into your routines prior to competition. Use methods that help you to achieve the level of intensity, confidence, and focus that you desire. Be careful to not create superstitious routines because such routines may seem to be helpful but can create problems if you are not able to complete them satisfactorily. Identify Helpful People. Some people are more encouraging than others and can help you achieve the state that you desire. Others are more likely to be demanding or critical which can have a negative impact on you. Cultivate the relationships that benefit you and seek those people out prior to competition. Avoid people who discourage you. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Depression Articles Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment Questions you should be asked at a minimum prior to a diagnosis of depression and treatment. When Your Loved One Refuses Help Discusses ways to respond when your family member refuses mental health treatment. I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where do I Start? Provides some suggestions to help you get started with CBT. Depression is not Sadness Discusses the difference between clinical depression and the normal state of sadness. What is Depression? A Frequently Misunderstood Illness Identifies the different types of depression and how to understand the nature of depressive illness. What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy(MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Discusses the research regarding MCBT and what are realistic expectations for treatment. How to Interfere with Therapy When Your Loved One Has Anxiety or Depression Discusses how well-meaning family members can interfere with the progress of therapy. PsychNotes on Depression Is Diet a Cause or Consequence of Depression? And How is Impulsiveness Related? When You Love Someone With Depression Something Good About Depression? Why People with Depression Avoid Positive Experiences: or, It's Impossible to Pull Yourself Up by Your Bootstraps On the Importance of Healthy Eating When Severely Depressed Persistence, Zest for Life, and Mindfulness It's Not as Simple as Being Grateful Gut Bacteria, Auto-immune Diseases, and Depression Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants Antidepressants Do Little for Mild to Moderate Depression Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong How Does Cognitive Therapy Help Depression? Treatment Resistant Depression isn't Resistant to Cognitive Therapy Does Sadness Cause Depression? Qigong Can Reduce Depression Problem with Depression and CBT: It Can Be OverWhelming Stomach Bacteria and Depression? Really? Moody? Maybe It's Your Stomach Bacteria Can Pop Culture Make You Depressed? Harnessing Happiness When You Have Depression Does Trauma Cause Depression? Why Some Girls Are More Vulnerable to Developing Depression/Anxiety When Marital Conflict is Present Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Grief is Not Depression Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood CBT vs. Medication for Depression Exercise Can Help Adolescents With Depression Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Terms of Use & Disclaimer Welcome to ExcelAtLife.com. Privacy Policy The following are the Terms of Use that govern use of this website and its mobile applications ("apps"). By using the site and/or apps, you agree to be bound by these Terms and to follow these Terms and all applicable laws and regulations governing the site/apps. Excel At Life, LLC reserves the right to change these Terms at any time, effective immediately upon posting on the site. Your continued use of the website/apps will constitute your acceptance of any future modifications. If you do not agree to be bound by these Terms, please do not use the site or apps. Permitted Use You are only authorized to view and to retain a copy of pages of this site/apps for your own personal use while visiting this site or using the apps. The content on this site/apps is the property of Excel At Life, LLC and/or its licensors, suppliers, and/or partners and is protected by U.S. and international copyright, trademark, and other intellectual property laws. Such intellectual property laws generally prohibit the unauthorized reproduction, distribution, or exhibition of all text, photographic, and graphic images, music, sound, and other protected materials. Except as expressly provided under these Terms of Use, the copying, reproduction, publication, display, rearrangement, redistribution, modification, revision, alternation, cropping, re-sizing, reverse engineering, movement, removal, deletion, or other use or change by you of any such website content is strictly prohibited. The violation of applicable intellectual property laws may give rise to civil and/or criminal penalties. Excel At Life, LLC is willing to grant website owners and/or administrators a revocable, non-exclusive license to post articles found on this site to their own websites or websites they administer or control, provided that the posting includes the author's name, a proper copyright notice, and link to ExcelAtLife.com at the end of each article. No such license shall be granted unless the posting complies with these requirements. Disclaimer of Warranties YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU ARE USING THE WEBSITE AND APPS AT YOUR OWN RISK. THE WEBSITE/APPS ARE PROVIDED ON AN 'AS IS' AND 'AS AVAILABLE' BASIS AND EXCEL AT LIFE, LLC HEREBY EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS AND IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTIES OF ACCURACY, RELIABILITY, TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, NON-INFRINGEMENT, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR ANY WARRANTY, CONDITION, GUARANTEE, OR REPRESENTATION, WHETHER ORAL, IN WRITING, OR IN ELECTRONIC FORM, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE ACCURACY OR COMLPETENESS OF ANY INFORMATION CONTAINED THEREIN OR PROVIDED BY THE WEBSITE/APPS. ANY ADVICE OR ASSISTANCE FURNISHED HEREUNDER AND RESULTS THEREOF ARE PROVIDED AT YOUR SOLE RISK AND EXPENSE. EXCEL AT LIFE, LLC DOES NOT REPRESENT OR WARRANT THAT ACCESS TO THIS WEBSITE/APPS WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED OR THAT THERE WILL BE NO FAILURES, ERRORS, OR OMISSIONS OR LOSS OF TRANSMITTED INFORMATION. EXCEL AT LIFE, LLC DOES NOT WARRANT THAT THE WEBSITE/APPS, ITS SERVERS, OR EMAIL SENT FROM THE WEBSITE/APPS ARE FREE OF VIRUSES OR OTHER HARMFUL COMPONENTS. YOU EXPRESSLY AGREE THAT YOUR USE OF THE WEBSITE/APPS IS AT YOUR SOLE RISK. Website Materials All material on this website and in the apps is provided for self-help purposes only and is solely the opinions of ExcelatLife, LLC and contributors, and should not be construed as professional advice, therapy, or instruction. The information on this website is in no way intended to diagnose, cure, or treat any medical, physical, or other condition. There is no guarantee of validity or accuracy. No action or inaction should be taken based solely on the contents of this information; where appropriate, readers should consult appropriate health professionals on any matter relating to their health and well-being. The information provided on ExcelAtLife.com and in the apps is designed to complement, not replace, the relationship between a patient and his/her own physician or therapist. The website content is intended for adults over the age of 18. Anyone under the age of 13 must have verifiable parental consent before using the website/apps or posting content to the website. Every effort is made to ensure that the information on this site and in the apps is accurate and up to date, but no legal responsibility is accepted for any errors, omissions or misleading statements. Nor can this site owner be responsible to you or any third party for any direct, indirect, special, consequential, punitive damages, or other losses or damages of any kind allegedly sustained arising out of the use of this website/apps or information contained within. This site owner cannot be responsible for any loss, damage or expense that might be caused by any action, or lack of action, that a user of this site/apps might take as a result of reading any information it contains. Responsibility for such actions, or lack of actions, remains with the reader concerned. Where appropriate, links to other sites are made. Links to other websites are provided in good faith and are for informational purposes only. Excel At Life, LLC has no control over and expressly disclaims any responsibility for, and cannot guarantee the quality, accuracy, or legality of, information on such third-party sites. The inclusion of a hyperlink should not be construed as an endorsement by Excel At Life, LLC. Nonetheless, Excel At Life seeks to protect the integrity of this site and welcome any feedback about this site or mobile apps. This site may automatically produce search results that reference or link to third party sites throughout the internet. Excel At Life, LLC has no control over these sites or the content within them. Excel At Life, LLC cannot guarantee, represent or warrant that the content contained in the site is accurate, legal and/or inoffensive. Excel At Life, LLC does not endorse the content of any third party site, nor can warrant that they will not contain viruses or otherwise impact your computer. However, if you have a problem with a link from this site, please let us know through the Contacts page and Excel At Life will investigate the link and take appropriate action. Some of the links are affiliate links whereby the site owner receives financial compensation should a purchase of products or services be made by clicking on said links. This site owner has no responsibility for these sites and cannot guarantee the quality of their information, nor the quality of any product or service purchased. Privacy Policy Excel At Life, LLC takes your privacy seriously. Please consult our privacy policy, which can be found at https://www.excelatlife.com/privacy_policy_2017.htm, before using ExcelAtLife.com or our apps. All web servers track basic information about their visitors. This information includes, but is not limited to, IP addresses, browser details, timestamps and referring pages. None of this information can personally identify specific visitors to this site. The information is tracked for routine administration and maintenance purposes. Abuses of the Website or Policies Without limiting other remedies, Excel At Life, LLC may limit, suspend, or terminate its service, prohibit access to the website/apps and their content, services, and tools, delay or remove hosted content, and take technical and legal steps to keep users off the website if Excel At Life, LLC thinks they are creating problems or possible legal liabilities, infringing the intellectual property rights of Excel At Life, LLC or third parties, or acting inconsistently with the letter or spirit of Excel At Life, LLC's policies. Indemnify Your use of this site and/or apps indicates that you agree to indemnify and hold harmless Excel At Life, LLC, its subsidiaries, affiliates, officers, agents and other partners and employees, from any loss, liability, claim or demand, including reasonable attorney's fees, made by any third party due to or arising out of your use of the site/apps, your submissions or content, including your use of the site to provide a link to another site or to upload content or other information to the site, your breach of the Terms of Use or Privacy Policy, or your violation of any law or the rights of any third party. Choice of Forum The Terms of Use shall be governed in all respects by the laws of the State of Missouri, without regard to its conflicts of law provisions. Any claim of any kind, nature, or description is barred and waived, and no proceedings of any kind may be commenced by you, unless you institute proceedings within one (1) year after the claimed breach occurs. Excel At Life, LLC may, at its sole discretion, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction with respect to any claims it may have against you, or any claims for injunctive relief or interim measures to prevent or stop irreparable harm to Excel At Life, LLC's rights or property. You hereby irrevocably submit to the jurisdiction of the courts within Stone County, Missouri, with respect to any such litigation. All claims filed or brought contrary to this section shall be considered improperly filed. Should you file a claim contrary to this section, Excel At Life, LLC shall recover attorneys' fees and costs up to $1,000, provided that Excel At Life, LLC has notified you in writing of the improperly filed claim and you have failed to promptly withdraw said claim. General Provisions If any provision of this Terms of Use is held to be invalid or unenforceable, such provision shall be struck and the remaining provisions shall be enforced. Headings are for reference purposes only and do not limit the scope or extent of such section. No waiver by either party of any default shall be deemed a waiver of any subsequent default. In the event of any translation of the Terms of Use into a language other than English, the provisions of the English-language version shall prevail and govern in the event of any conflict or inconsistency in interpretation. Funding for Excel At Life This site is supported by advertising generated by Google, Inc. and its affiliated companies. Additional funding is provided by Excel At Life, LLC, the corporate owner of the site. Contact Information Concerns or questions about this Terms of Use can be submitted as follows: Excel At Life, LLC 18593 Business 13, Ste. 206-3273 Branson West, MO 65737 (314) 843-0080 http://www.excelatlife.com/contact_info.htm Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire (Young adult version) The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire determines how sensitive you are to rejection. Take test No login required to obtain results FOR ADULT VERSION Related reading: The Porcupine Effect: Pushing Others Away When You Want to Connect 20 Steps to Better Self-esteem Why Social Anxiety Disorder may be Created by Culture Can Being Shy Affect Your Well-being and Relationship? Yes, but It Depends... Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Can Facebook Make You More Anxious When Meeting Someone? Social Anxiety and Bias in Forming Impressions Acts of Kindness and Social Anxiety How Do You Handle Rejection? The Pesky Chemical Causing Social Memory Problems Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability More questionnaires: Willoughby Social Anxiety Scale List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Downey G. & Feldman, S. (1996). Implications of Rejection Sensitivity for Intimate Relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1327-1343. Feldman, S. & Downey, G. (1994). Rejection sensitivity as a mediator of the impact of childhood exposure to family violence on adult attachment behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 231-247. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 50 Rules of Life Next The 50 Rules of Life are based upon psychological principles that can help people succeed in all aspects of life. The rules are meant to be contemplated so that you can determine how to implement them in your life. Read the accompanying article to each rule to help stimulate your thinking about what the rule can add to your life. Rule 1: The Moment is More Important than Capuring the Moment(read more...) Rule 2: To Be Considered, Be Considerate(read more...) Rule 3: Listen to All Advice(read more...) Rule 4: Make Your Share of Mistakes(read more...) Rule 5: Dream the Dreams of Fools(read more...) Rule 6: Change Yourself--Don't Wait for the World to Change(read more...) Rule 7: Make One Life Better Today(read more...) Rule 8 Lift People Up, Don't Put Them Down(read more...) Rule 9 Persist, No Matter the Odds(read more...) Rule 10 Do One Small Thing(read more...) Rule 11 Ask All the Questions(read more...) Rule 12 Gathering Your Tools is Half the Job(read more...) Rule 13 You are not that important. But you are valuable.(read more...) Rule 14 A Mindful Life is a Healthy Life.(read more...) Rule 15 Don't Compare Your Insides to Others' Outsides.(read more...) Rule 16 Balance Life With Balance(read more...) Rule 17 Time is Precious--Choose How You Use It(read more...) Rule 18 Perspective--Choose to See the Whole Elephant(read more...) Rule 19 Accept, Don't Demand(read more...) Rule 20 Be Responsible to Yourself(read more...) More to Come! Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Free Anxiety Management Audios Panic Assistance Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Panic While Driving Education Panic Assistance While Driving Panic Assistance If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Learning to Tolerate Anxiety If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Panic Assistance Audio that helps you cope with a panic attack. This is not a relaxation audio. The purpose of this audio is to coach you when you are experiencing high anxiety or panic. The focus of the audio is to help you learn to tolerate the uncomfortable sensations of anxiety while learning to reduce the symptoms. This is based upon the theory that the fear of the symptoms tends to trigger repeated panic attacks and that as you reduce your fear of the symptoms, the likelihood of panic is reduced. NOTE: Due to the non-specific nature of panic symptoms, it is important to obtain a complete physical and an accurate diagnosis from a physician prior to assuming that the experience was a panic attack. For more information, read How to Manage Panic and Anxiety. TRANSCRIPT Listen Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma This audio provides assistance when you are overwhelmed with anxiety and can't focus on relaxation especially if you are experiencing depersonalization or derealization (you or your surroundings don't feel real). The grounding technique can be particularly helpful when someone has anxiety due to trauma which is causing flashbacks to the memory of the trauma. It has you focus on your immediate surroundings to help focus away from the traumatic memory. This type of audio is not for the purpose of relaxation but to help you feel more focused so that you can use other techniques. Once you have used the mindful grounding technique and can focus a bit more, it is a good idea to use the relaxation audios to help calm yourself further. It is best to listen to this audio for the first time when you don't need it so that you will have an idea of what to expect. In addition, developing an understanding of mindfulness can help with this practice: Understanding Mindfulness. TRANSCRIPT Listen Learning to Tolerate Anxiety This educational audio helps you to understand the concept of tolerating anxiety and why it is important. The fear of the anxiety and the demand to get rid of it makes the anxiety worse. The more you learn to tolerate anxiety, the less intense and frequent it will be. Developing mindfulness skills increases the ability to tolerate anxiety because mindfulness focuses on the immediate present not on the catastrophic worries about the future. The more that you focus on the "what ifs" regarding anxiety, the more likely your anxiety will be triggered. However, the more you can can understand and accept the anxiety, the less insistent it becomes. TRANSCRIPT Listen Panic While Driving Education Frequently, people who have panic attacks develop a fear of having a panic attack while driving a car. They are afraid they will lose control and hurt themselves or others. For most people this fear is based upon inaccurate assumptions about panic attacks and how an attack can affect driving. Although there are a few people who may have medical conditions that can be triggered by a panic attack, most people who have panic attacks can safely drive or make the decision to determine the need to stop driving while calming themselves. If you have been checked out physically by your physician and cleared for driving, this audio can help explain why you can safely drive with a panic attack. TRANSCRIPT AND DOWNLOAD Panic Assistance While Driving This audio can help coach you while having a panic attack when driving. It is meant to be used for therapeutic driving exposures when challenging the avoidance of driving. It is not meant for general coaching. Listen to the Panic While Driving Education audio prior to using this audio during driving. Consult with your therapist and obtain clearance from your physician prior to using. For more information, read How to Manage Panic and Anxiety. TRANSCRIPT AND DOWNLOAD Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Exercise and the Self-Esteem Cycle by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. and Susan Gustafson "Individuals high in self-efficacy, the belief that they can be successful at an activity, and in self-esteem, a perception of positive self-regard, are more likely to engage and adhere to an exercise program." Tweet Low self-esteem has been implicated in most psychological dysfunction; however, low self-esteem is not necessarily the root cause of this dysfunction. It is believed (Aro, 1994) that individuals with high self-esteem who may be predisposed to psychological disorders are better equipped to cope with those disorders, and thus, reduce the negative consequences that may result. Therefore, if self-esteem can be enhanced, the psychological consequences of disorders can be reduced. This process can be illustrated by describing a similar process that occurs with physical illness such as diabetes. The individual may be genetically predisposed to developing the illness, but if they engage in the proper healthy care-taking activities, they may prevent the development of the illness or, at least, reduce its consequences (Amir et. al., 1990. The enhancement of self-esteem and self-efficacy can be an important contributing factor to both the prevention of psychological and physical illness and the maintenance of health. Exercise is in the position of being able to contribute to the prevention of illness or the reduction of its effects through the process of improving self-esteem. Reviews of the literature (Gauvin & Spence, 1996) illustrate clearly that exercise contributes to improvements in self-esteem. The purpose of this paper is to review two lines of research showing the relation of exercise to self-esteem. First, numerous correlational studies (Fontane, 1996) show that individuals with high self-esteem are more likely to engage in exercise regularly. Second, a substantial number of experimental studies show that the implementation of a consistent, long-term exercise program has the effect of increasing self-esteem (Fox, 2000). The articles we reviewed for this paper show this pattern in both adults and children. The focus of this paper is on the construct of self-esteem, the process of evaluating the self negatively or positively, rather than on the construct of self-concept, the descriptive judgment of the self, as most of the research articles are poor at making the distinction between these two constructs. Studies examining self-efficacy, which is the level and strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity, have also been examined given the similarity of this construct to self-esteem. In addition, most measures used examine the evaluation of the self-concept, considered self-esteem, rather than a description of self because the researchers are interested in improving psychological health, not merely describing it. However, as Sonstroem and Morgan (1989) indicate, an understanding of the underlying structure of the self-concept can contribute to the process of mediating change in self-esteem. Sonstroem and Morgan (1989) use a model for the structure of self-esteem with is hierarchical in nature and progresses from an individuals perception or evaluation of his/her behavior in specific situations through successive categorizations to the end result of general self-concept. They propose a model for self-esteem and exercise which involves the individuals self-perceptions progressing from the specific to the general. Specific self-perceptions begin with self-efficacy beliefs regarding the individuals sense of competence with a particular physical activity. Intermediate self-perceptions involve physical competence which is the individuals sense of overall fitness and physical acceptance which is the degree of satisfaction with the body. These more specific self-perceptions are then integrated into the global perception of the self. According to Sonstroem and Morgan (1989), the more specific self-perceptions are more amenable to change than the general self-perceptions. Self-Esteems Impact on Exercise Behavior Generally, the correlational research examining self-esteem (and other similar constructs) has shown a relation between self-esteem and the probability of engaging in exercise and maintaining an exercise program. The presence of high self-esteem or self-efficacy beliefs has been demonstrated to be factors in determining whether an individual will elect to participate in an exercise program. The research as reviewed by Gauvin & Spence (1996) indicates that exercise adherers report higher levels of efficacy beliefs about their ability to adhere to exercise as well as for their physical proficiency in exercise activities. In contrast, research with adolescents with low self-esteem shows tendencies to under-eating and over-eating with less likelihood of physical activity (Mueller et. al., 1995). With respect to adults, studies utilizing the Physical Self-Perception Profile (PSPP) successfully demonstrated that positive physical self-worth showed a relationship between global self-esteem and the sub-domain levels of sport confidence, physical conditioning, attractive body image, and strength. Further, it predicted exercisers from non-exercisers as well as degree of exercise involvement for both males and females (McAuley et. al., 1997). A study of Chinese students showed that higher body esteem in males tended to be associated with increased exercise, whereas overall Chinese students tended to have lower self-esteem and engage in less exercise than their American counterparts (Davis & Katzman, 1998). Finally, the correlational studies show that there appears to be a lack of a relation between exercise and self-esteem for individuals who do not view exercise as essential (McAuley et. al., 1997). Also, not all research demonstrated a correlational effect between exercise and self-esteem; for instance, Aine and Lester (1995) found no effect on a self-report questionnaire examining regular exercise and amount of exercise in students. Self-efficacy research with older adults tends to support the theory that individuals with high self-efficacy beliefs are more likely to engage in exercise. In addition, high self-efficacy predicts the likelihood of maintaining an exercise program (Fontane, 1996). For instance, Grembowski et. al. (1993) found that older individuals with high self-efficacy are fairly consistent in positive outcome expectations across different specific health-related behaviors such as exercise, diet, and smoking, and therefore, more likely to follow through on achieving the expected outcome. Just as the cognitive processes of children have been categorized by age, the development of self-esteem also seems to be age-dependent and is impacted over time by social interaction and personal experiences. Self-esteem impacts specific factors such as physical self-efficacy, self-confidence, anxiety, and perceived control in both male and female athletes of all ages and across different sports. An individuals participation in sports tends to be related to these factors (Boyd & Hrycaiko, 1997). Exercise Behaviors Impact on Self-Esteem The research has shown that when adults, adolescents, and children undertake an exercise program self-esteem is enhanced in the process. This paper examines a number of articles examining the different age populations and the influence of exercise on self-esteem. As research had not previously demonstrated the relation of an environmental influence such as physical activity and its effect on the development of self-esteem in children, Boyd and Hrycaiko (1997) examined this relation more directly. This study of pre-adolescent and adolescent females revealed that the pre-adolescent low self-esteem and low physical self-concept groups derived the greatest benefit from the physical activity intervention. The purpose of the study was to examine the effects of a physical activity intervention package which involved a six-week structured exercise program on the self-esteem of pre-adolescent and adolescent females. They hypothesized that a physical activity intervention would positively affect physical self-concepts and global self-esteem of low-esteem early and pre-adolescent subjects. Upon examination of the intervention package of self-esteem, ranked on the basis of total self-concept, the impact was significant only for the physical appearance of self-concept for the pre-adolescent girls. With respect to the pre-adolescents, partial support for the hypothesis was made since this group experienced significant changes in global self-esteem. However, the results for the early and middle adolescents did not support the hypothesis, as these groups did not have significant changes in self-esteem. Therefore, the hypothesis that a physical activity intervention would have a positive effect on physical self-concepts was only partially supported. Support for the third hypothesis that the greatest effect would be with the early adolescents followed by the pre-adolescents came from the data showing that the pre-adolescents garnered the most benefit from the intervention package, the early adolescents showed somewhat mixed results, while no significant results were seen with the middle adolescents. It was concluded that the impact on the two adolescent age groups was limited because their levels of self-esteem were high from the start and the physical activity program wasnt challenging enough to the adolescent group to produce significant change. In a study comparing pregnant adolescents engaged in a six-week course of aerobic exercise with a control group of pregnant adolescents not engaged in exercise, conducted by Koniak-Griffin (1994) at UCLA it was demonstrated that an aerobic exercise program reduced depressive symptoms as well as improved feelings of self-concept. Interpretation of the data from this research coincides with the generally accepted theories of this field. First, the author concluded that the improved mental status could be the increased plasma levels of endorphins. Second, the increased feelings of self-efficacy could be the result of participation in the program. Third, the participants needs were met simply by being involved in a group activity that provided new opportunities, social contact, and group acceptance. Lastly, the exercise provided a diversion and allowed participants to forget about their problems. In general, the results of this study concur with previous research as to the positive effects of aerobic exercise on mental health, but individual with higher self-esteem do not exhibit significant changes. Research on adults has revealed consistent results similar to the research with adolescents. Two of the reviewed studies are specific to women; however, another study which included middle-aged men and women showed similar results. A study examining acute mood response in women at two separate time periods, conducted by Pronk et.al. (1995) at Texas A & M, revealed that maximal exercise shows acute increases in fatigue and self-esteem and decreased tension and vigor. A study of the effects of an eight-week walking program on self-esteem in women conducted by Palmer (1995) at Northeast Louisiana University concurs with the previously stated research. This study also showed improvement in self-esteem following the implementation of a fitness program. They hypothesized that walking will improve scores on depression, self-esteem, and physical fitness. Results of the data showed that, not only did the walking group have an increase in self-esteem, but that the non-walking group had a significant decrease in self-esteem. However, interpretation of the results are similar to that of the pregnant adolescents in that the changes in self-esteem could have been due to other factors such as acquiring a new skill, engaging in social interaction, the influence of the researchers, or having accomplished a difficult task. Additionally, significant improvements in self-esteem are more pronounced when individuals initially have very low self-esteem. These participants described themselves as fitness rejects which could also explain their more notable improved feelings of self-efficacy. Another important point is the finding that physiological improvement is not necessary for psychological improvement. The women in this program did not know their improved fitness levels before the post psychological measures were taken, indicating that the self-esteem changes were not related to the physical improvements. However, both physical and psychological benefits from the walking program were demonstrated. A study by McAuley et. al. (1997) at University of Illinois of exercise and self-esteem in middle-aged adults participating in a twenty week structured exercise program demonstrated support for the theoretical relationships among the components of self-esteem. The purpose of this study was to determine the relation between general self-concept and the specific subareas of self-concept, specifically how the changes in efficacy and aerobic capacity as well as engaging in an exercise program impacted self-worth. This research tested the extent to which self-esteem changed over time with exercise participation and within the hierarchical structure of self-esteem as postulated by Sonstroem and Morgan (1989). The results demonstrated that improved levels of physical self-efficacy and fitness were more directly related to physical self-esteem than perceptions occurring in the subareas. The authors conclude that the findings are consistent with the Sonstroem and Morgan model indicating that self-efficacy predicts physical competence which then impacts self-esteem. Conclusion Individuals high in self-efficacy, the belief that they can be successful at an activity, and in self-esteem, a perception of positive self-regard, are more likely to engage and adhere to an exercise program (Fontane, 1996; Gauvin & Spence, 1996; McAuley, et.al., 1997). This is consistent with Sonstroem and Morgans (1989) model of self-esteem enhancement through exercise. The individuals who have belief in specific competencies are more likely to engage in exercise and then experience success which increases their likelihood of continuing exercise. In addition, exercise is likely to increase self-esteem. These findings are fairly consistent across different age ranges and length of exercise programs as well as intensity of exercise (Boyd and Hrycaiko, 1997; Koniak-Griffin, 1994; McAuley et. al., 1997; Palmer, 1995; Pronk et.al., 1995) The relation of the correlational studies indicating that high self-esteem individuals are more likely to participate in exercise and the experimental studies showing improved self-esteem from exercise implementation can be understood through Banduras (1977) concept of reciprocal determinsim. This theory indicates that behavior, personality, and environment interact together to determine personality and behavior. Thus, the personality trait of positive self-regard leads to the adaptation of exercise behavior. Engaging in the behavior of exercise, in turn, leads to greater positive self-regard; thus, they impact on one another is a reciprocal fashion. Although the articles we reviewed didnt examine the nature of environment in this equation, it can be postulated that increased self-esteem and exercise behavior can also impact environmental conditions. For instance, exercise may bring the individual in contact with others who are more interested in fitness which may encourage the continuation of these behaviors. In fact, several articles (Koniak-Griffin, 1994; Palmer, 1995) speculated in their conclusions that the social contact may be a mechanism of change for self-esteem. It does seem that the research has difficulty demonstrating that the improvements in self-esteem are directly related to engaging in physical activity versus engaging in any positive goal-oriented activity. The studies did not directly compare exercise to other goal-oriented behavior. Also, third variables such as social influence may be involved in the outcome of the research. Another problem in the research is the use of average or high self-esteem research participants; few studies have used clinical populations (Paluska & Schwenk, 2000). Findings may have been clearer if clinical populations who are particularly low in self-esteem such as depressed individuals had been used. However, it is significant that in some studies when higher self-esteem populations were used that self-esteem was still shown to be enhanced which strengthens the conclusion that self-esteem is improved through exercise. It seems that the research on self-esteem points to a complex problem involving enhancing self-esteem. That is, individuals who are higher in self-esteem may be more likely to engage in exercise behavior. The experimental studies conducted are artificial environmental conditions given they dont address an individual independently and voluntarily engaging in exercise. It would be interesting to see how this factor would impact the self-esteem. Also, a major problem is how to induce individuals low in self-esteem to voluntarily engage in exercise. Overall, the connection between self-esteem and exercise has been fairly established although, as identified above, there are specific issues that need to be more clearly defined and more rigorous experimental research conducted. References Aine, D. & Lester, D. (1995). Exercise, depression, and self-esteem. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81, 890. Amir, S., Rabin, C., & Galatzer, A. (1990). Cognitive and behavioral determinants of compliance in diabetics. Health & Social Work, 15, 144-151. Aro, H. (1994). Risk and protective factors in depression: a developmental perspective. Acta Pyschiatrica Scandanavica, 89, 59-64. Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Boyd, K.R. & Hrycaiko, D.W. (1997). The effect of a physical activity intervention package on the self-esteem of pre-adolescent and adolescent females. Adolescence, 32, 693-707. Davis, C. & Katzman, M.A. (1998). Chinese men and women in the United States and Hong Kong: body and self-esteem ratings as a prelude to dieting and exercise. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 23, 99-102. Fontane, P.E. (1996). Exercise, fitness, and feeling well. American Behavioral Scientist, 39, 288-305. Fox, K.R. (2000). Self-esteem, self-perceptions and exercise. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 31, 228-240. Gauvin, L. & Spence, J.C. (1996). Physical activity and psychological well-being: knowledge base, current issues, and caveats. Nutrition Reviews, 54, 53-63. Koniak-Griffin, D. (1994). Aerobic exercise, psychological well-being, and physical discomforts during adolescent pregnancy. Research in Nursing and Health, 17, 253-263. Leith, L.M. (1994). Foundations of Exercise and Mental Health. West Virginia: Fitness Information Technology, Inc. McAuley, E., Mihalko, S.L., & Bane, S.M. (1997). Exercise and self-esteem in middle-aged adults: multidimensional relationships and physical fitness and self-efficacy influences. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 20, 67-83. Mueller, C., Field, T., Yando, R., Harding, J., Gonzalez, K.P., Lasko, D., & Bendell, D. (1995). Under-eating and over-eating concerns among adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 1019-1025. Palmer, L.K. (1995). Effects of a walking program on attributional style, depression, and self-esteem in women. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81, 891-898. Paluska, S.A. & Schwenk, T.L. (2000). Physical activity and mental health. Sports Medicine, 29, 167-180. Pronk, N.P., Crouse, S.F., & Rohack, J.J. (1995). Maximal exercise and acute mood response in women. Physiology and Behavior, 57, 1-4. Sonstroem, R.J. & Morgan, W.P. (1989). Exercise and self-esteem: rationale and model. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 21, 329-336. Susan Gustafson is a personal trainer in the St. Louis, Missouri area. She can be reached at the following: LifeLong Fitness, LLC Susan Gustafson Director of Health & Fitness Suite 14 Clayton, MO 63105 (314) 863-6263 Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles When Needs Come Into Conflict by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The problem is that when needs are in conflict neither is necessarily right or wrong although each person may believe that their position is the correct one." Tweet Recently, a website reader submitted a passive-aggressive example to Excel At Life for suggestions. However, this example appears to be a case of when needs come in conflict rather than passive-aggressive behavior (although there is certainly passive-aggressive behavior present): My husband and I had a new house built. Our first home was agreed upon to become a rental property. The rental property, we agreed, would pay for our daughter's college education. One week before moving into our new home, my husband canceled the lease that I obtained through a realtor and informed me that his cousin was moving in. You guessed it: the rent was always late and my husband started picking the rent up piecemeal. Didn't work out. Cousin eventually moved out and we had to pay for a moving van! This scenario played out twice more, costing us tens of thousands of dollars. I'm crying all the time, my hair fell out and my daughter's college tuition is still unpaid. Today, my husband claims that he does not understand! When approaching my husband concerning the rental property, I said, Honey, talk to me, please explain what is happening, we agreed what was the purpose. Further, I stated to my husband that he went behind my back and offered my sister a lease although my sister came to me and I told her that I needed to speak with my husband. I asked my husband again, what is going on and explained to him that family, friends and business should never mix. Meanwhile, I'm still waiting for an explanation, he moved his nephew's family in without consulting me as if we had never talked at all. All of this took place between 2000 thru 2008 and my husband will not talk at all when this subject is brought up. We went to counseling over this issue in 2004 and after one session, he said to the counselor, 'my wife is grieving her mother and we will not need any other help.' By the way, my mother passed away in 2009! This example illustrates the problem of when couples are faced with important needs that are in direct conflict with one another. In other words, meeting one person's need means not meeting the other person's need. The Process of Conflict Resolution As I discuss conflict resolution, keep in mind that I am only pursuing one possible explanation for the conflict described in the above example so as to use it as an example of a common problem couples experience. I have not conducted a thorough evaluation of this situation so my assumptions may be completely wrong in this particular instance. However, that is not important for the purpose of this particular discussion about when needs come in conflict. 1) Important needs come into conflict. More commonly than not, couples have different needs and these needs come into conflict. Sometimes these needs are considered major by both people. For instance, one wants to have children, the other doesn't. Or, one wants to move for a job opportunity, the other wants to stay near family. The problem is that when needs are in conflict neither is necessarily right or wrong although each person may believe that their position is the correct one. Why do I think this is an example of needs in conflict? The wife strongly indicates that her need is to pay for their daughter's education. However, the husband appears to be expressing a need as well, although his is a passive, if not passive-aggressive, expression of the need (at least as described in the example). Most likely, if I were to make an assumption, his need is to take care of family which is commonly an important need for many married men. It may seem that based on this description, the wife and the husband's needs are not very differentthey both want to take care of family. Yet, their needs ARE different. What makes their needs so different? The difference here is a matter of definition. Basically, we have two caring people who want to help family. However, they may define family differently. The wife's definition is focused on the nuclear family (husband, wife, children) whereas the husband's definition of family includes the extended family. Thus, their definition of family is the source of their conflict. (As I said before, I could be wrong in this assumption. There could be some other reason for his decision. For instance, maybe he is uncomfortable dealing with strangers. However, if it is a different reason, it is still a need of his that is coming in conflict with his wife's need and the process for resolution remains the same). 2) Fully understanding those needs. When there is a conflict of needs, the first step is to discuss those needs and understand what they are. "Maybe I misunderstood, but I thought we wanted this property to be an investment for our daughter's education. Can we discuss what our plans are so that we can both fully understand the other and reach a decision about what to do?" Such a question needs to be said in a concerned but unemotional tone. In addition, an appropriate time to discuss the problem needs to be agreed upon so that they are both prepared and in the right emotional state to calmly approach the discussion: When would be a good time for you to discuss this? If we can pause to understand how the other person's needs are not unreasonable, we have the first step towards seeking compromise. For instance, the ability to say (and truly mean) I understand your needs are [this] and they are valid. My needs are [this] and I believe they are valid as well. Is there another way we can resolve this to meet both of our needs? Obviously, prior to this statement, it may be necessary to ascertain the other person's needs: I can see this is important to you. Can you explain it to me? Frequently, we tend to look at a situation from our own perspective and can't understand how the other is unable to see the importance of our perspective. In fact, the wife labeling the husband's behavior as passive-aggressive shows that she likely believes he is deliberately being unreasonable and resistant to meeting her needs. Certainly, there are passive-aggressive elements here but the issue here is that both people care about family. By starting with their area of agreement and validating one another's position, they have a greater chance of listening to one another. Researchers Sandra Murray and colleagues (2003) showed that couples who show high regard for one another have more positive outcomes when disagreement occurs. In particular, when a person feels less valued in the relationship they are more likely to see disagreement as rejection and to distance themselves from the relationship. Such distancing prevents resolution of problems. Thus, the context of disagreement is important. For instance, the marital therapy literature has often espoused the five-to-one rule which indicates healthy relationships usually have five positive interactions for every negative interaction. Thus, when couples maintain such a ratio they are more likely to feel valued which allows greater ability to discuss the areas of disagreement without feeling rejected. 3) Coming to an agreement. If both people can clearly see one another's viewpoint, then they have the opportunity for discussion and agreement. Of course, they have to be willing to recognize that the final agreement may not look at all like what they initially had in mind. They need to brainstorm possibilities. This can start with an initial statement of the problem: I understand that you want to help family members with financial problems. That is very kind of you and I appreciate your need. My need is to provide for our daughter's education and I believe that is important for you, too. Is there a way we can meet both of our needs? Let's brainstorm possibilities. The concept of brainstorming is a very specific one. It means to develop a list of ideas no matter how reasonable or unreasonable they may be. During the brainstorming process there is no criticism of the ideas, just an expression of them. The purpose of this is that sometimes even a crazy idea can generate other ideas that could work. In addition, if the ideas aren't criticized, it allows for a free expression of ideas. For instance: We can pay our daughter for any work she does on the rental property and put it in a college account. We can cut back on expenses in other areas of our life to help support family. We can try the realtor at least once and see how that works. I will handle all the details. We can sell the house and use the proceeds for the college account. We can let our daughter know she is financially responsible for her college education. We can set limits on help much we can help family. Once a list of possibilities have been developed, then the couple can examine the ideas and determine if any of them can work. To come to an agreement, they need to be willing to fully explore all possibilities and let go of demands for a certain outcome. This process is often referred to as win-win conflict resolution as opposed to the common win-lose approach described in the above example. 4) When an agreement can't be reached. Sometimes one or both people are set on handling the situation according to their own need. If the couple has high regard for one another this may resolve by one person being asked to accept the other person's need: I know this is important to you, but I just can't do it right now. I hope you'll support me on this. Of course, as you can see, this requires a high level of personal insight and ability to communicate. In the situation described above, both people have become entrenched in their position to the degree that they can't even discuss the problem any longer. Such an entrenchment is more likely to occur if they have not been able to engage in the previous steps described and have instead approached the problem with a high degree of conflict and little regard for the other's position. In such a case, the individual on the losing side may have to decide whether they can live with the outcome. Sometimes there may be needs where a person can't live with the final outcome and may decided to leave the relationship. For instance, if one person wants children and the other person adamantly doesn't. It there is no resolution to such a major issue, then a person needs to ask if they can accept that or if they need to leave. However, if they decide to accept it and stay, then the next step is to truly let it go. 5) How to let go. In this particular situation that first occurred in 2000, the most important aspect at this point in time is for the wife to learn to let go. This is not a solvable situation. The problem, however, is that she believes that it is solvable. She believes that if she can just find the right words, get the right help, she can get through to her husband and convince him to see the situation from her point of view. However, at this point, that is not possible. Already, too much anger, crying, and avoidance has occurred. This is a hot topic that just the mention of it will create tension and conflict. It's also possible that it could have undermined feeling valued in the relationship which means that the more important issue at this point is how to repair the relationship. Apparently, she has already decided that she is not going to leave him over this issue as it has not changed in 14 years, so it does not appear to be a deal-breaker for her. Therefore, she has to decide to let it go. That doesn't mean just to say that her husband won and she shouldn't say anything more, but letting it go means forgiving and moving on. This is important for her sake due to the stress this has caused her (i.e. hair falling out). In other words, she needs to recognize This situation is not going to change. Am I going to let it poison my relationship or am I going to focus on what is good in the relationship? The article Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve discusses further forgiving transgressions, whether intentional or unintentional. Most transgressions involve loss. In this instance, the wife feels the loss of not being able to provide for her daughter in the way she wants. Therefore, she needs to grieve this loss so as to be able to let go. This is a process. It is not just simply changing her thinking. However, grieving eventually allows a person to come to acceptance. In this case, the wife is stuck in the denial stage of grief. She is still trying to find a way to convince her husband. Instead, she may need to say to herself I'm not going to be able to solve this. Once she fully recognizes this, she is likely to have all sorts of emotions such as anger and sadness. She needs to be able to release these emotions but in a private way such as by writing about them or talking to a trusted friend. You might say that she has already been emotional and that hasn't helped her come to any resolution. Why would grieving be any different? The difference is in the focus. The focus of her emotions has been on the frustration of trying to solve the problem. Instead, the grief emotions are focused on the idea that she can't solve the problem. As a result, such a focus can eventually lead to an acceptance or forgiveness. Being able to forgive is important for her as well as her marriage. References Murray, S.L., Bellavia, G.M., Rose, P. and Griffin, D.W. (2003). Once Hurt, Twice Hurtful: How Perceived Regard Regulates Daily Marital Interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84,126147. DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.126 Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Questions and Comments All comments and questions require approval so you may not see your submission immediately. Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Autogenic Relaxation Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Autogenic Relaxation Training This audio teaches autogenic relaxation which is a focus on the pleasant sensations of warmth and heaviness coming into your body. Practicing this method will help you become more skilled at being aware of your body, where you feel tension, and replacing the tension with pleasant warmth and soothing heaviness. About 9 minutes. When doing any mindful or relaxation exercise, it is important to very gently bring your focus back to your experience if distracting thoughts occur. Do not try to get rid of the thoughts because that interferes with the relaxation process. Instead, just gently refocus back to the exercise. Once you have learned this technique, you can use it to help whenever you feel stressed. You won't need to listen to the entire audio but will be able to focus on the sensations of your body, being aware of the tension, and releasing the tension by replacing with the relaxing sensations of warmth and heaviness. Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Too Stressed to Relax? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...the truth is that you don't have the time not to take care of yourself." Tweet You can't escape being stressed. It is a fact of modern society. With technology and the move to a more urban society, stress is a constant. Stress includes the daily stress of living life as well as the stress unique to each person's situation such as a demanding job or chronic illness or the death of a loved one. SOME TERMS TO KNOW 1) Stressor. The event or situation that causes stress is called a stressor. A stressor may be positive or negative but in some way it places demands upon the individual. 2) Stress. Usually, stress refers to the reaction the person experiences. This can be a physical reaction such as tension, headaches, stomach distress, or sleep disturbance. Or it can be an emotional reaction such as agitation, nervousness/anxiety, or sadness. 3) Mindfulness. The state of being fully present in the moment is referred to as mindfulness. When people are more stressed they tend to be less mindfully aware because they are distracted by worries, concerns, and demands on their attention. MODERN DAY STRESSORS 1) Multi-tasking. Have you noticed how multi-tasking is often referred to with pride? I can do three things at once. However, you really can't. Your brain can only focus on one thing at a time. When you are multi-tasking, it means that your brain is switching from one focus to another very rapidly. Some people may be able to do this more quickly than others. However, such multi-tasking comes at a cost. The cost is the stress experienced. The brain finds this constant switching focus to be stressful because it needs to re-organize information in memory again and again. As a result, it becomes less efficient. Therefore, whenever you are trying to do more than one thing at a time, you will accomplish each of the tasks less well. For example, have you ever tried to text and talk to someone at the same time? How much do you actually hear of the conversation and how involved are you? Does the other person have to repeat themselves? Are there more errors in your text? By doing one task at a time and then moving on to the next, you will not only accomplish them all more quickly, but you will do a better job with each task. In addition, you will be less stressed because this is a more mindful way of approaching things. 2) Decision-making. Have you ever stood in front of a display of toothpaste or deodorant or toilet paper trying to make a decision about which product to buy? The number of choices has become overwhelming. These simple decisions are a good example of what has occurred in this modern age. A hundred years ago people didn't have to make dozens of little decisions each day because there weren't as many choices to make. The simple process of daily living has become much more complicated. If you find this difficult to believe, keep a tally for one day of how many different decisions you make. Now, there are probably ways that you have simplified this process. With the example of the toothpaste, you probably have a way of making the decision such as buying the same brand all the time or buying the cheapest brand. That is what this article is about. How can you approach the stressful situations in life to reduce the impact they have upon you? 3) Entertainment. Even entertainment and leisure activities tend to be stimulating and stressful as our culture has become less mindfully focused and more outcome focused. In the past, sitting on the porch and having a conversation with a neighbor may have been the evening's leisure activity. How many people can do that now without being interrupted by a phone call or a text or even checking their team's scores on their smart phone? Many people think that watching television or playing a game on their phone is relaxing. However, these activities actually stimulate the brain and prevent true relaxation. Our bodies need to regenerate each day. We do this with sleep. However, our brain also needs rest and that requires deep relaxation. (Read article: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important?) Our brain needs times where it can be quiet. WHAT IS A STRESS REACTION? Hans Selye first proposed the General Adaptation Syndrome over sixty years ago (Selye, 1946) to describe the process of experiencing, reacting, and adapting to stress. His suggestion of three stages to the stress reaction has stood the test of time. 1) Alarm reaction stage. When a person first encounters a stressor, it is identified as a threat to the system. Even something that is positive may be perceived as threat because it involves having to adapt in some way. Therefore, the body prepares its defenses to deal with the stressor. These defenses include the release of adrenalin and the stress hormone cortisol. These brain chemicals help the body to prepare to deal with a threat. Adrenalin helps the body to physically prepare such as increasing muscle tension and energy level so as to react quickly. Cortisol helps the body to mentally prepare such as improving memory function or decreasing pain sensitivity. 2) Resistance stage. The resistance stage is the time period in which the individual is coping with the stressor. During this time, the person is usually feeling good and able to cope due to the body's preparation with the chemical release. At this point an individual may not even recognize the stress reaction they are experiencing because their functioning is at a heightened level. In fact, many people state during this stage, I thrive on stress because they are coping well. However, depending on the stressor involved or if numerous stressors occur, this stage may not last long enough to deal with the problem. Then, the individual is likely to deplete all the body's natural defenses coping with the situation. 3) Exhaustion stage. Once the natural resources are depleted, the exhaustion stage occurs. The resources may be depleted after the stressor is over or if the stressor is ongoing the resources may be depleted when a person is still dealing with the stressful situation. The exhaustion stage is when the body is trying to recover from the stress. Depending on the amount of stress experienced, this stage can be short or can become chronic and create other problems such as clinical depression. Chronic stress can also cause physical problems due to the increased adrenalin and cortisol in the system. High levels of cortisol has been associated with an increase in the body fat around the mid-section which has been linked to diabetes and heart disease. Because the exhaustion stage frequently occurs after the stressor, many people aren't even aware of why they are feeling bad. I've had many clients tell me in their first visit, I don't know why I'm having problems now. Everything is fine now. It was last year when everything was happening. The exhaustion stage is what most people refer to as being stressed. This is when you experience the stress reaction or the effects of stress. These effects include extreme fatigue, loss of drive/interest, agitation, sleep problems, body aches and pains, low resistance to illness, anxiety, and depression. WHAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT STRESS? Some people seem to react more to stress than others or to be able to tolerate stress for longer periods of time. Some people may even seem to thrive on stress. However, the truth is that in most cases these folks simply use better coping strategies and have incorporated healthy coping practices into their lifestyles. These strategies and coping practices may look natural if they learned them at a young age. However, these are skills that most people can learn to help manage stress better. COPING STRATEGIES 1) Recognizing Stress. Too often people are stressed and don't realize it. As a result, by the time they start to do something about the stress it has already affected them to a great degree and is much more difficult to resolve. It is best to use many of the stress management practices as ongoing lifestyle practices to prevent the impact from stress. However, even if you do practice stress management, it is beneficial to recognize stress so that you can take additional precautions to reduce the impact. Awareness allows you to take steps such as eliminating a stressor or changing it in some way. In addition, awareness allows you to choose what you need to do to take better care of yourself. 2) Problem-solving. One method to help prevent stress is to engage in active problem-solving. Instead of allowing events to occur, the more you consider situations and potential consequences you can solve a problem before it becomes a stressor. Many situations might easily be resolved if they are caught early. One good way to learn to engage in problem-solving is to listen to others. If someone points out a possible problem, don't ignore them and assume that everything will be okay. The more you can acknowledge you don't know something and get assistance, you can reduce the problems or stress that might occur. One time when I was working with a professor in college, he said to me Of course you know the research of so-and-so. Instead of admitting that I didn't, I spent the night in the library. If I had just stated that I wasn't familiar with the research, he probably would have given me the articles I needed to read. That taught me an important lesson that has reduced my stress throughout life. Another aspect of problem-solving is planning your stressors. With the stressors over which you have some control, you may be able to decide when you can best handle them. For instance, if you plan to buy a new home but you know that your job situation may change, wait to buy your home until you have settled the job situation. 3) Healthy Lifestyle Practices. The more you take care of yourself physically, the more you can cope with stress. A healthy body functions better and an unhealthy body is likely to cause additional stress. For instance, if you are out-of-shape physically, many things that wouldn't affect you become more stressful such as walking up a flight of stairs. The main lifestyle practices that help us function at our best are exercise, eating nutritiously, and getting enough sleep. The more you maintain your overall health, the more you can tolerate stressful situations that occur. 4) Reducing Stressors. Many times when people are stressed, there may be aspects of the stressor that can be changed to reduce the amount of stress experienced. The first step is to determine whether the stressor is controllable, partially controllable, or uncontrollable. Sometimes it is a good idea to get the opinion of an objective observer because you may not be able to see the situation clearly. For example, a client of mine had a boss who was petty and mean. She was convinced that the situation was not controllable because if she stood up to him she would lose her job. However, we focused on practicing assertive communication which she put into practice at work. Over time, not only did he treat her better but he saw her as management material and gave her a promotion. Therefore, don't assume that you can't control a stressful situation. Get someone else's opinion. If you determine that certain aspects of the situation are controllable, then develop a plan for changing the situation and reducing the amount of stress you experience. If the stressor cannot be controlled, it is especially important to engage in healthy stress management practices. By taking care of yourself and improving your body's defenses, you will have less impact from the stress or you can recover more quickly from the effects. 5) Coping Practices. A variety of stress management methods are available that can help you calm your body and reduce the release of adrenalin and cortisol. By using these methods routinely, you can decrease the impact of stress on your body. The relaxation and meditation audios can teach you methods to quiet your system and restore internal balance. You may download free audios from Excel At Life to help you do this. OBSTACLES TO COPING Many times people know what they can do to manage stress better, but certain thinking styles are obstacles to using the methods that can be helpful. 1) Time. The most common reason people have for not using stress management or healthy lifestyle practices is time. I don't have the time to do that! I already have too many things to do. On the surface, this reason seems completely valid. However, if examined more closely, it can be seen as unreasonable in most situations. The reason this is true is because when you are in a stressed state of mind everything takes more time. You are less able to focus, concentrate, and remember. You are often physically sluggish. Even if you try to speed up, you will often make more mistakes or struggle with how to do something that normally would be easy. In addition, the things that people do when stressed such as consume more caffeine and other substances are likely to cause problems. These problems then take additional time. Other times people relax by watching television or smoking. Again, these take time. So, overall, you may believe you don't have the time to take care of yourself, but the truth is that you don't have the time not to take care of yourself. Many of the stress management techniques, once learned, take very little time. And they will give you much more time in return. 2) Effort. Another reason people report for not using stress management methods or doing problem-solving is the amount of effort it takes. Frequently people just aren't aware of how much effort they are already using to deal with the stressor. The difference with the stress management methods is that the effort is effective. In other words, instead of going in circles you actually get somewhere. 3) Lack of Confidence. Sometimes people lack confidence in themselves or in the stress management skills. Sometimes people think that the skills sound too simple. How could something as simple as listening to a 20-minute audio help? That couldn't possibly help with how bad I feel! Other times people don't believe that they can actually change the situation. Maybe someone else could do that, but I can't. If that is the case, they may need some cognitive therapy to help change the thinking styles that create a lack of confidence. 4) Expense. Another reason people give for not doing the healthy coping practices is the expense. Usually this is due to only seeing certain aspects of coping with the stress but not examining all the possibilities. For instance, a person might think I need a massage, but I can't afford it right now so there is nothing I can do for my tension. The nice thing about stress management is there are many different methods and usually do not cost much. A FINAL NOTE If you read much of what I have written, you will notice that I often refer to Mindfulness. In cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) we have come to understand that mindfulness helps to reduce stress which can help individuals be more effective in dealing with all sorts of physical and emotional problems. I found an interesting quote from 1976 by Hans Selye that appears to foreshadow this movement towards mindfulness in CBT. He spoke of his philosophy of gratitude which was based on the conviction that by earning our neighbor's love and becoming necessary to him, we can satisfy our own selfish needs while helping others. In this way we avoid creating interpersonal stress situations, and instead can make stress work for us. References American Psychological Association (2012). Stress in American: Our Health at Risk. http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/stress/index.aspx Selye, H. (1974). Stress without distress. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co. Selye, H. (1946). The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases of adaptation. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology, 6, 117-231. Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles But It Happened Before! If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download But It Happened Before! by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "Highly successful people recognize that almost every situation is different so that the potential for success occurs by trying again..." Tweet You have probably heard some variation of Albert Einstein's definition of insanity: Doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results. This definition has been popularized by pop psychology and marketing gurus to emphasize the importance of taking a different approach to solving a problem. Basically, the idea is you can't keep engaging in the same unsuccessful or even self-destructive behavior and expect that you will succeed next time. Although this quote is valid in the right context, too many people use it as a general principle for life without fully understanding it. Therefore, it is important to understand this quote precisely. It states doing the SAME thing OVER and OVER. Which certainly, if there is no variation in what is being attempted, how can there be different results? However, this quote can be used as an excuse to not be persistent. For instance, if someone makes an assumption based upon a single piece of information, they might say, I already tried that. Why bother to try it again? Many people have a problem with the irrational thought process of generalization which refers to believing that because something occurred previously, you will experience the same outcome again. On the surface, this appears directly opposed to Einstein's definition of insanity. But it is not! Too often people will be afraid of trying something because they were unsuccessful previously. However, they need to recognize that it may not be the exact situation as the previous one. For instance, a college student searching for a job contacts someone she knows at a company to get assistance obtaining a job. The person rather rudely says I can't help you. The college student interprets this as meaning that what she did was inappropriate and is hesitant to contact someone else she knows to network for job leads. I'm not going to be able to get anyone to help me. In this example she is engaging in generalization. She believes that because one person refused to help her, that another person will refuse as well. SUCCESSFUL PEOPLE DON'T GENERALIZE FAILURE Highly successful people recognize that almost every situation is different so that the potential for success occurs by trying again with another person or a different approach. In fact, the basic premise in the sales profession is to put the last rejection behind you quickly so that you can move on to the next sale. Just because one person isn't interested doesn't mean that will be true of the next person. The more times the salesperson fails, the more he/she is likely to be successful because sales is based on the number of attempts. A certain percentage will have a positive outcome. The college student interpreted the situation based on herself which led to the generalization that no one will help her. She believed that she had done something wrong which led to the rejection. However, if she examined the situation differently maybe she could recognize that other factors could be present that might not be present in her next attempt. For instance, maybe the person she called was extremely busy and couldn't assist or perhaps the person was worried about his/her own job and didn't want to give out leads to potential competition. So, unknown to her, a variation may exist in the next attempt she makes because she is contacting a different person. DEFINITION OF GENERALIZING Generalizing is to infer general principles based on limited information. It is the belief that what happened in one situation is likely to occur in another. Therefore, it is expecting the SAME outcome in a DIFFERENT situation. PROBLEM WITH GENERALIZING The irrational thinking style of generalizing usually prevents someone from being persistent and trying different variations until they can achieve the desired outcome. So, just as we can't expect a different outcome in the same situation, we need to be cautious basing our decisions about trying to accomplish something on the fear of obtaining the same result. For example, when I was first learning assertion skills I practiced them by asking for discounts when making a purchase. At first, my word choice You wouldn't consider giving me a discount, would you? was very ineffective. In addition, I probably conveyed in my body language that I didn't expect them to respond to my request. However, I kept trying different variations. One day I was with my sister who had just selected a washing machine and was ready to purchase it and I looked the salesperson in the eye and said very firmly, How much of a discount are you giving her? He immediately discounted it 30% without hesitation. If I had generalized from my initial failures, I would never have learned how to assert myself effectively. If we generalize, we are likely to quit. If we quit, we are not likely to achieve what we want at all. Einstein also said We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used when we created them. Therefore, by changing our thinking we are more likely to achieve more of what we want. By changing our thinking we are more likely to solve our problems. By changing our thinking we are more likely to change our lives. HOW TO CHALLENGE GENERALIZING So how can generalizing be addressed? 1) Recognize that You are Generalizing. Examine the situation and determine what is the actual evidence you have? Are there other possible variations of the situation? Are you dealing with a different person? Have you learned new skills? Can you take a different approach? 2) Don't Assume the Outcome. If your answers to the above questions indicate that there are differences between the current or upcoming situation and previous situations, then you need to be cautious about assuming. Any differences indicate that you don't know what the outcome will be. When changes are made, especially if they are calculated to improve the outcome, it is more than likely that the outcome will be different. 3) Be Willing to Try. Experience often is the best teacher. If you continue to confront a situation trying different approaches or with different people you will learn what it takes for you to be successful. Even the experience of failure teaches you what doesn't work so that you can learn what will work. Thomas Edison made many attempts to create a light bulb to use in the home. However, his attitude was I have not failed 10,000 times. I have not failed once. I have succeeded in proving that those 10,000 ways will not work. When I have eliminated the ways that will not work, I will find the way that will work. Obviously, Thomas Edison did not generalize. He also did not do the SAME thing OVER and OVER. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Questions and Comments All comments and questions require approval so you may not see your submission immediately. Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Does Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Lack Compassion? It Depends Upon the Therapist by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...because CBT can be implemented in such a non-personal fashion, it is even more important for the therapist to be attuned to what is often referred to as the non-specific factors of therapy: compassion, empathy, positive regard, and other relationship factors. " Tweet A complaint often heard about cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is that clients may experience it as harsh and demanding. People turn to therapy for a sympathetic ear, reassurance, and help with addressing an overwhelming problem. Unfortunately, many people report that their experience with CBT and its focus on changing irrational thinking and maladaptive behavior is offensive, belittling, and impersonal (patient forums on the internet). Why Has CBT Lacked Compassion? 1) The therapist's approach. In my opinion, as a CBT therapist, the problem is not CBT itself but how it is presented by the therapist. Although CBT has been consistently shown in laboratory experiments to be an effective, if not superior, treatment for depression and anxiety, the story is more murky when examining real-world psychotherapy outcomes (Beutler et al., 2012; Nathan et al., 2000). In particular, laboratory studies involve very specific protocols for treatment whereas real-world studies are dependent upon the decisions of the individual therapist. As a result, real-world treatment depends more upon the qualities of the therapist such as warmth and empathy and how the therapist presents the treatment. 2) Demands by healthcare companies. A complicating factor has been that CBT is often considered a treatment of choice by managed care insurance companies because it can be conducted from a manual, and thus, is considered simpler to provide. Such a feature has been attractive to these companies because their provider panels tend to use less experienced and less educated mental health professionals which keeps their costs down (Seligman and Levant, 1998). However, research consistently shows that the experience of the therapist is related to the effectiveness of the treatment even more so than the type of therapy (Hubbert, et al., 2001). As a result of the manualized approach encouraged by the insurance companies and implemented by less experienced therapists, many clients are on the receiving end of a step-by-step procedural CBT that is lacking. CBT is anything but simple when implemented correctly! Personally, I believe that because CBT can be implemented in such a non-personal fashion, it is even more important for the therapist to be attuned to what is often referred to as the non-specific factors of therapy: compassion, empathy, positive regard, and other relationship factors. Such factors can be a critical component of helping clients to accept the often uncomfortable methods of CBT. Why Are the Non-Specific Factors Important? Everything is context. For example, although I tell my clients to watch the word choice they use when talking to themselves, word choice doesn't matter as much depending upon if it is in the context of acceptance. For instance, if I don't accept myself and tend to blame myself, saying to myself That was really stupid, Monica can have a profound negative impact on me. However, I can use the same words in a state of acceptance and I don't take it in the same way. Similarly, if my client makes a mistake and I say Well, that was silly, wasn't it? how it impacts my client is based on the relationship I have with that client. If my client feels accepted by me, flaws and all, such a statement allows us to laugh about the situation, learn from it, and move on. However, if my client does not feel accepted by me, such a statement can contribute to feelings of blame and low self-esteem. Therefore, it is important for the therapist to be aware of the relationship with each client. Even subtle rejection by the therapist can have profound effects (Lambert, 2013) making this an area where it is easy for even an experienced therapist to make mistakes. I know I certainly have. At times when I say something that I believe is in the context of a warm and accepting relationship, the client will hear me based upon their inner voice. Since I come from a family where we tease and can argue and disagree but still accept and love one another, I need to be aware that not everyone will interpret my statements as they are intended. I once had a client who was extremely terrified due to severe sexual abuse as a child as well as neglect and emotional abuse. She believed the lies she was taught by her abusers so thoroughly that whenever I brought up her critical thinking about herself she would immediately have a panic attack. It was impossible for her to understand that I could be accepting of her and not blame her for what had happened in her childhood. Therefore, I needed to be especially careful initially and the focus of treatment had to be on the relationship until she could trust me enough to look at what she had been taught to think about herself, how it was inaccurate, and how to challenge it. If I had been a therapist with a rigid policy that clients have to be ready to do whatever I say (as some CBT therapists do), she probably would not only have left therapy but would have felt inadequate and may not have tried therapy again. Instead, she is now able to be a productive adult in a healthy relationship. In such situations, I need to be very careful of how I interact with the client. My natural tendency to use humor needs to be suppressed initially until that person feels accepted in the relationship. In addition, compassion and empathy allows me to know when someone is ready for certain therapeutic methods. By fully understanding the perspective of the client, I can gently move them toward the more effective, but more intense, methods of CBT. This allows the client to feel understood and increases the responsiveness to CBT. Certainly, with less severe problems this may not be an important factor. A person who has reasonably good self-esteem and is experiencing normal life problems can respond quite well to a more manualized approach. Unfortunately, most research has been conducted with such higher functioning individuals so that the emphasis has been more on the treatment method than on the therapeutic relationship (Lambert, 2013). Hopefully, we will see more of a change in the future as to the importance of implementing CBT with a focus on compassion and empathy. A recent book by Cory Newman (2013) teaching therapists the methods of CBT spends several chapters discussing the therapist factors and the impact on therapy outcome. In particular, he discusses the importance of the therapeutic alliance and having patience by recognizing that what we are asking of our clients can be quite demanding. This is a departure from most books on CBT which focus only on the methods. However, he asserts that accurate empathy, warmth, good listening skills, and clarity of communication is a starting point that needs to be combined with the organizational, conceptual, and technical skills that are well-tied to CBT theory and principles. What Should You Consider When Seeking CBT? 1) Comfort with the therapist. Part of the therapist's job is to help you feel comfortable. You will be discussing and confronting unpleasant and uncomfortable topics. Therefore, you need to feel compassion, warmth, acceptance, and empathy from the therapist which should allow you to feel comfortable in therapy. If you don't, you can discuss this with the therapist or seek another therapist. Do not assume that all CBT therapists are the same. If CBT did not work for you and you were not comfortable with the therapist, it is more likely due to the therapist's approach, not the CBT itself. 2) Individualized approach. Although there are certain methods that help certain kinds of problems, your treatment plan should be based upon an evaluation of your situation and what is most likely to help. Therefore, even though reading and assignments are often a part of CBT, it is not a one-size-fits-all therapy. Your assignments should be determined based upon your goals for therapy. 3) Flexibility. CBT is ultimately flexible when applied with expertise and not following a formula. Some clients feel blamed when they do not respond to certain methods. However, it is the method that didn't work, not the individual. Even if the issue is inability to follow the plan, the plan needs to be reassessed rather than blaming the individual. CBT has many methods so that when one doesn't work, another might. 4) Therapist's experience. Experience isn't just the number of years someone has been practicing but it is also how the therapist was trained and the intensity of the training. For instance, a semester course in CBT is not likely to provide the same level of training as a year-long supervised fellowship. A therapist more fully trained in CBT is likely to take a much more active, directive approach with emphasis on the specific goals of treatment than someone with less experience. In an initial session, the therapist should be able to comfortably provide an overview of therapy and what to expect. References Beutler, L.E., Forrester, B., Gallagher-Thompson, D., Thompson, L. and Tomlins, J.B. (2012). Common, Specic, and Treatment Fit Variables in Psychotherapy Outcome. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 22, 255281. DOI: 10.1037/a0029695 Huppert, J.D., Bufka, L.F., Barlow, D.H., Gorman, J.M., Shear, M.K. And Woods, S.W. (2001). Therapists, Therapist Variables, and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy utcome in a Multicenter Trial for Panic Disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 747-755. DOI: 10.1037//0022-006X.69.5.747 Lambert, M. J. (2013). Outcome in Psychotherapy: The Past and Important Advances. Psychotherapy, 50, 4251. DOI: 10.1037/a0030682 Nathn, P.E., Stuart, S.P. and Dolan, S.L. (2000). Research on Psychotherapy Efficacy and Effectiveness: Between Scylla and Charybdis? Psychological Bulletin, 126, 964-981. DOI: I0.1037/0033-2909.126.&.9S4 Newman, C.F. (2013). Core Competencies in Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy: Becoming a Highly Effective and Competent Cognitive-Behavioral Therapist. New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. DOI: 10.1037/a0033780 Seligman, M.E.P. and Levant, R.F. (1998). Managed Care Policies Rely on Inadequate Science. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 29, 211-212. DOI: 10.1037/0735-7028.29.3.211 Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Contact Information Mailing address: 18593 Business 13 Ste. 206-3273 Branson West, MO 65737 Phone: 314-843-0080 Excel At Life Contact Form Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 5 Methods to Managing Anger If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet 5 Methods to Managing Anger This audio is for people who have trouble managing their anger and find it affecting their relationships personally, at work, and in their community. The primary focus for managing anger is about taking personal responsibility rather than blaming others for the anger. Therefore, the focus is about taking control of your anger to change yourself and your reactions rather than expecting others to change. The audio teaches ways to managing unreasonable anger but the methods provided require effort over time to truly make a difference in your life. The transcript is provided below for your convenience. TRANSCRIPT Listen 5 Methods to Managing Anger The following is for people who are frequently angry at others when it may not be reasonable. If your anger has a valid reason some of the following may be helpful but it is also a good idea to try to problem-solve the situation. In other words, determine the reason for the anger and whether you can work with the other person to solve the problem. However, many people have problems managing their anger which can interfere with effective problem-solving. Frequently, such people believe they don't have control over their emotions, especially anger. It's how I feel! I can't help it! And although this belief may be true in some ways, it is also very wrong. Certainly, emotions are what they are. Emotions are reactions to events. However, our perceptions of events can change. I once worked with a man with serious road rage. If someone cut him off in traffic, he chased that person down and forced them to a stop. Fortunately, he was not physically aggressive against them although they didn't know that. However, he did get out of his car and start yelling at the person about their driving behavior. This was in the days before everyone carried cell phones, otherwise he may have gotten arrested for this. I asked him, What is your purpose? and he told me he wanted to let people know when they were wrong so they wouldn't do it again. I then asked, Do you think your method of educating people is effective? Or, do you think that maybe people don't even hear what you are saying because they are terrified of this crazy man who chased them down? He came to recognize that his behavior wasn't any better than theirs (and probably worse) and he wasn't achieving his goal of making the roads safer. The point of this example is that he changed his perception of the situation, and as a result, was able to change his behavior. Now certainly, that doesn't mean he necessarily changed his emotionperhaps he still became angry at people. But at least he didn't chase them down. However, it is possible to change your perspective in such a way that you may not even feel angry. For instance, have you ever been angry about something and then realized you misinterpreted the situation or the intent? In such an instance, your anger may have disappeared once you realized you were wrong. In a similar way, we are capable of using the POSSIBILITY of misunderstanding to help change our perspective. In other words, we don't have to KNOW we are wrong. Instead, we can consider that we may be wrong and give the other person the benefit of the doubt. Let's look at a simple example based upon the guy with road rage. If he thinks, That person cut me off because they are inconsiderate and don't care about putting my life in danger he is more likely to be angry. However, if he even considers the possibility that they just made a mistake he is less likely to be angry. Maybe that person just didn't see me in their blind spot. And if he considers that there could have been a valid reason for their behavior, he may not only not be angry but he find feel very different, Maybe that person had to swerve over to avoid an accident that could have involved me. The point of this is that every one of the thoughts I just described are speculative including his original belief that the person was just rude and uncaring. In other words, he has no idea which one may be true. Or, if the truth may be totally different from any of these possibilities. This illustrates that much of the time when people become angry it is because of what they presume to be the truth. We don't always know what the truth is. Therefore, the first step in managing anger is when you are not absolutely certain, without a doubt, that your perspective is correct, you need to redirect your thinking: I don't know why that person cut me off. If I need to make an assumption, I can choose a positive one and believe that there was a good reason. By changing your perspective in this way, you are likely to reduce your angry reaction. This method works for all sorts of situations. No matter how well you know another person, you are not inside that person's head. You do not know all the reasons for another person's behavior unless they tell you. Most of the time you are making assumptions. And if you are making an assumption, you are choosing among many possibilities which assumption to believe. Thus, if you want to control your anger, you can begin by choosing a different assumption to believe. For instance, my husband is usually late. When we were first together I assumed that he just didn't care about my feelings. However, I came to realize that he is a very social person who enjoys talking to people and loses track of time when he is socializing. And socializing to him can mean a conversation in the grocery store. Something that could take me 15 minutes to do might take him an hour or more. But it had nothing to do with how he felt about me! It was just his nature. By recognizing this I changed my perspective and was less likely to be angry. In addition, if it was something important that I needed him to be on time for I would let him know that. To change your perspective, you need to examine other people's behavior from their point of view, not just your own. A concept in psychology that we call projection is the tendency to attribute to other people the reasons why we would do something. For example, a person who tends to be dishonest is more likely to believe that others are dishonest. And vice versa, those who are honest believe others are likely to be honest. Or, in my example about my husband, my original belief was based on my own behavior--the only reason I would be late is an emergency. Therefore, my original assumption was that if there is no emergency it is inconsiderate of my husband to be late. Projection is a natural tendencya way to understand other people's behavior. However, it can very often be wrong. Other people don't behave for the same reasons we do. So, unless you want to be wrong in your assumptions, you need to look at other people's behavior from their perspective. The same behavior can mean different things to different people. So the first step in managing your anger is asking yourself if there could be other reasons for a person's behavior. Ideally, you may be able to brainstorm some possibilities. But even if you are not able to do that, at least tell yourself, My assumption may be wrong. There could be other reasons for this behavior. Sometimes the first step is enough to dissipate the anger. However, if it is not, you may need to take other steps. It can be very helpful, for instance, to learn relaxation methods so that you can calm yourself when you are angry. It is very difficult to be fully relaxed and angry at the same time because those two emotional states are opposites. The more you can relax yourself, the more clearly you will be able to examine the situation. Excel At Life has many free audio downloads that you can use to learn relaxation methods. It is best to learn the deep relaxation first so that you will be more effective in applying simple relaxation methods in the moment that you need them such as breathing methods or muscle relaxation. The next step if you are still uncertain and angry is to check out with the other person the reasons for their behavior. For some situations in which you may not have any further contact with someone such as the example of someone's driving behavior, you may not be able to check out your assumption. But if it is possible, you may want to ask the person about their reasons. For example, my husband was fishing with a fishing novice and he had set up the line and the lure. But his friend didn't catch any fish. After awhile, my husband gives him a different pole saying, You're not going to catch any fish on that. Use this one. Many months later when this friend wouldn't go fishing with him again he found out that the friend had assumed that my husband deliberately gave him the wrong pole initially. My husband said No, after seeing how the fish were biting, I knew that setup wouldn't work. If the friend had said something immediately, there may not have been any hurt feelings. To check out his assumption, he could simply have said, Why did you give me that pole if I'm not going to catch any fish on it. And my husband could have explained, I thought you would catch fish with it but I could see that it wasn't working so I'm trying a different method. See how checking out an assumption can make a big difference? Unfortunately, if you wait too long to check out a person's reasons not only do you carry around the resentment but you also are likely to further justify your feelings. In other words, this person may have examined all of my husband's behavior based on this inaccurate assumption and come to the inaccurate conclusion that my husband wanted to hurt him rather than help him. My husband's reaction to this was Why would I take you fishing if I didn't want you to have a good time and catch fish? Therefore, check out assumptions and try to do it before you have built up resentment and start interpreting all of the person's behavior accordingly. However, if you are listening to this audio, you have likely already built up resentment about previous situations. And emotions reinforced over time are more difficult to change, even emotions based on inaccurate assumptions. This doesn't mean you can't change those emotions, it's just that you have to put more effort into it than simply redefining your perspective or checking out your assumption when a situation occurs. What can you do about long-term resentments that may be based on inaccurate assumptions? It is still helpful to check out the assumption if you can. If not, at least try to determine if there are other possibilities for the person's behavior. You can even check with other people you trust to get their perspective. As a therapist, this is often a big part of my job when I am working with people who are overly sensitive to others' comments and behavior. I help people recognize that there could be other reasons so as to give them a different perspective. In addition, if you have built up negative emotions about someone, you may need to deliberately create positive emotions. A good way to do this is the Loving-Kindness Meditation which you can download from Excel At Life. This meditation focuses on deliberately enhancing positive emotions towards other people. Once you have practiced the method consistently, you may find that you can use it in the moment in many situations. For instance, if someone cuts me off in traffic, I use one of the statements from the meditation May you be safe to prevent myself from becoming frustrated. It is very difficult to genuinely wish positive things for someone else and to be angry at the same time. Those are different parts of our brain that don't interact well together. We can be angry or we can be loving but it is difficult for both at the same time. Also, the Compassion meditation allows us to view the limitations and flaws of other people from a more compassionate perspective. However, it is a more advanced meditation and should only be used once you are fairly skilled with the Loving-Kindness meditation. Finally, another aspect of managing anger is managing what we call displacement of anger. For some people, when they are angry or stressed they will take out these emotions on an innocent person who did not cause the problem. For example, a boss berates an employee and then that person lashes out at an assistant. I was bad at taking my stress home and being irritable with my husband. One way I managed this displacement was to stop at my front door and ask myself, Am I going to take my stress in with me or leave it out here? I can walk in with a smile on my face or I can be irritable. What is my choice? Simply recognizing displacement and seeing it as a choice can make a big difference in how we act. When we take responsibility for our emotions we are more likely to take control of them. Instead of saying I can't help itit's how I feel making a choice creates the awareness in us that it is under our control. It is very difficult to recognize the choice and choose to be angry at an innocent person anyway. For most of us that would create what we call cognitive dissonance which is the discomfort caused by believing one thing but acting in another way. In this situation, believing we have a choice and still hurting an innocent person means we have to recognize that we are being mean to someone who doesn't deserve it. For most us, that is unacceptable. Therefore, recognizing the choice means we are more likely to not displace our anger onto an innocent person. Usually the reason we take anger out on another person is because it is a powerful release of the pent-up emotion. Instead, find another physical release of your anger such as punching a bag, screaming in a secluded place, or intense exercise. By doing so you can release the anger safely without hurting someone else. In summary, there are five things you can do to manage anger: 1. Change your perspective and your assumptions. Try to look at the situation from the other person's point of view or get assistance in examining your assumptions. 2. Learn relaxation methods. Practice the deep relaxation so that you can effectively calm yourself with the Quick Stress Relief methods when you need to. 3. Check out your assumptions. If possible, check with the other person to determine the accuracy of your assumptions. 4. Change your emotions towards the person. Use the Loving-Kindness and Compassion meditations to help you take a different emotional attitude towards the person. 5. Recognize displacement. Try to be fully aware of when you are taking your anger out on someone who is innocent and make a choice not to do so. Find some other way to release your emotions. Learning to control your anger takes effort time. It is necessary to practice these methods until you are able to use them in the moment. Copyright 2014 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles "How feedback is given to athletes influences both their immediate learning of a skill and their ongoing development as an athlete." Feedback, Self-Efficacy, and the Development of Motor Skills by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet Self-Efficacy Influences Motor Skills Development Although we may prefer to believe that learning a motor skill is purely learning a set of physical techniques, we have to consider that most learning typically takes place in the context of an interpersonal relationship with a teacher. The critical question is how does this interaction affect the development of motor skills. It appears that the mediating factor between the presentation of the instructions by the teacher and the performance of the skill by the student may be the cognitive process of self-efficacy (Escarti & Guzman, 1999). Some may argue that the development of effective skills may lead to the increased self-efficacy demonstrated by students of high ability. Although this process occurs, it is not sufficient for explaining the role of developing self-efficacy and its impact on learning motor skills. To fully explain the role of self-efficacy, we must evaluate the interpersonal context of how the teacher or coach provides feedback to the athlete, how that feedback affects self-efficacy, and how self-efficacy enhances performance. Unfortunately, studies directly examining this relationship are sparse, and therefore, the inferences need to be made based on research examining the relation of the different components of the equation such as the feedback/self-efficacy relationship and the self-efficacy/motor skills relationship. How Does Instructor Feedback Affect Skill Development? How feedback is given to athletes influences both their immediate learning of a skill and their ongoing development as an athlete. Research has primarily focused on two types of feedback provided by an instructor: knowledge of results (KR), or information regarding outcome, and knowledge of process (KP), or information regarding technique. Initially, most of the research was biased towards examining KR, and therefore, more evidence has supported the effectiveness of KR for teaching motor skills. Zubiaur et.al. (1999) discusses problems in previous research investigating the effect of feedback on motor skills; particularly, it has been conducted with simple, specific behaviors under tightly controlled conditions and has primarily focused on KR because KP is more difficult to manipulate and measure. They examined eight college athletes using a within-subjects design in which feedback was alternated on a schedule of obtaining baseline, KP, baseline, KR on one day and baseline, KR, baseline, and KP on the next day. Although the group as a whole did not show differences between KR and KP, three of the subjects did show superior learning with KP indicating individual difference effects for feedback. Interestingly, this study found that when KP was presented first followed by KR it may interfere with retention of the skill. Other recent research has shown KP to be effective and may have more value in helping an athlete internally assess his or her performance. KR may cause too much reliance upon external feedback which hinders the athletes ability to assess and correct performance independently (Swinnen, 1996). Swinnen discusses the guidance hypothesis which refers to the tendency of students to become dependent upon the feedback from an outside source. Most research had focused on extrinsic feedback, but it appears than intrinsic feedback can be more important especially when the student knows the basic skills but is focused on improving performance. This enhances the students ability to correct performance independently of the instructor which creates greater consistency because performance is not reliant upon the instructors presence. How Does the Type of Instructor Feedback Affect Skill Development? The question is, what is the process between the type of feedback used and the development of the skill? Does greater use of intrinsic feedback create a higher level of self-efficacy which in turn enhances the learning of motor skills? Self-efficacy as originally defined by Bandura (1977) is the level of self-confidence or the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a specific activity given a particular situation. The greater the individuals belief regarding performing the specific activity, the more likely he or she is able to successfully perform the activity even when self-efficacy is increased by means other than direct experience such as through observation of a model. Unfortunately, the above question is difficult to answer with the current available research. Studies directly examining the relationship between the guidance hypothesis and self-efficacy were not found. In particular, research examining the idea that the higher level of learning related to less dependence on external feedback which increases reliance on intrinsic feedback is due to changes in self-efficacy versus just the reliance on intrinsic feedback is not available. However, inferences can be made based on research examining the relation between feedback and self-efficacy and the relation between self-efficacy and the development of motor skills. 1) Role of self-efficacy. One interesting experimental study that examined all these components was by Escarti and Guzman (1999). They manipulated the type of feedback given after an initial task. The subjects were asked to estimate their self-efficacy for a second task and then given a choice of tasks of varying difficulty. The results indicated that performance feedback was related to increased self-efficacy, a higher level of performance, and the tendency to choose more difficult tasks. They concluded that self-efficacy is a mediating cognitive variable between feedback and performance and that the type of feedback affects the level of self-efficacy. This research most closely examines the question asked in this paper. However, it does not specifically address the issue of using methods of intrinsic feedback and how that relates to self-efficacy. 2) Role of intrinsic motivation. However, there are other studies that have examined the relation between the type of feedback given and the development of self-efficacy and intrinsic motivation. Allen and Howe (1998) examined the effect of coach feedback with female adolescents taking player ability into account in order to more clearly determine if self-efficacy is related to the outcome of the athletes performance or due to the type of feedback given by the coach. Questionnaires were given to the athletes and the results indicated that athletes level of perceived competence was greater with more frequent praise and information from the coach after a good performance and with less encouragement and corrective feedback after a poor performance. This relationship remained significant even after the effects of ability had been statistically controlled indicating that the increase in self-efficacy could not be attributed to the ability level alone. The authors concluded that the unexpected finding of a negative reaction to encouragement and corrective information was due to the population of adolescent girls who may be especially sensitive to feedback. This indicates that coaches may need to vary their feedback approach based on gender and age. In addition, an athlete may interpret frequent corrective feedback as a sign of low ability. 3) Effect of negative feedback. Negative evaluative feedback has been shown to be perceived by others as indicating low ability. Amorose and Weiss (1998) examined the role of evaluative feedback, focusing on approval or criticism, and informational feedback, focusing on skill-relevant information, on athletic learning. Sixty children in a sports program watched videotapes of students receiving different types of feedback and evaluated the participants ability, effort, and expectation of future success. Praise was perceived as an indicator of high ability whereas criticism was perceived as an indicator of low ability. Athletes who received informational feedback were rated higher in ability than those receiving neutral and those receiving criticism were rated lowest. How Does Intrinsic Motivation Develop? 1) Coach's behavior. Amorose and Horn (2000) examined the issue of coaches behavior on intrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation is the ability of the individual to self-motivate by setting goals and following through with behavior whereas extrinsic motivation relies on an outside source such as the instructor in order to perform. Intrinsic motivation is important because it leads to greater consistency in performance without the presence of the instructor being required. This study looked at how rewards are given through questionnaires given to athletes and found that the more controlling the reward or coaches behavior is, the less the athlete will be intrinsically motivated. Their primary result was that athletes respond with greater intrinsic motivation when coaches had higher levels of praise, encouragement, and informational feedback. In addition, a major gender difference occurred in that womens level of intrinsic motivation decreased in an environment with high levels of punishment-oriented feedback whereas mens level of intrinsic motivation was not affected. This finding is consistent with the research discussed earlier by Allen & Howe (1998) using adolescent females. 2) Coach's expectations. Another questionnaire study by Chase et.al. (1997) compared coachesefficacy expectations and actual team performance outcomes. Generally, they found that coaches tend to focus on the athletes skills over which they perceive as a coach they have more control. However, the researchers conclude that this focus on controllable skills is contrary to the methods that have been shown to be effective for improving physical skills (Amorose & Horn, 2000). 2) Goal-setting. Examining the research looking at the link between goal-setting, self-efficacy and performance is an interesting way to explore the issue of intrinsic feedback and its effect upon self-efficacy and performance because goal-setting and the information derived from measuring goals can be an internal method of feedback. In particular, a study by Kitsantas and Zimmerman (1998) indicated that self-efficacy predicts performance when internal methods of feedback are used. They examined adolescent girls for the acquisition of a novel physical skill using different performance strategies, goal-setting, and self-evaluative recording. It was found that an analytical strategy combined with goal-setting and recording of the goals and strategy was most effective for acquiring a new skill. In addition, these methods tended to increase self-efficacy which was predictive of their subsequent performance. Tzetzis et.al. (1997) indicates that goal setting and feedback are among the most important factors for learning physical skills. However, they suggest that when feedback is separated from goals, feedback does not improve performance. Intuitively, this makes sense as typically in any kind of coaching instruction, there is some sort of goal involved because the nature of feedback has to refer to a goal even if it is implicit. Tzetzis et.al. (1997) randomly assigned boys to three groups to examine knowledge of performance alone, knowledge of results with goal setting, and knowledge of performance and results with goal setting for the acquisition of basketball skills. They found that KP improved performance on complex skills whereas KR and goal setting improved performance on simple skills. The combined KP, KR, and goal setting group improved most but the outcome scores improved prior to form scores because outcome is more related to success. How Should Feedback Be Provided to Athletes? 1) Feedback should be based on level of skill. Given the mixed results in the literature, most likely there are a number of factors involved with how feedback is given and why it impacts the athlete negatively or positively. The evidence appears to indicate that feedback to athletes should vary based on the level of skill (Swinnen, 1996), the degree of self-efficacy (Escarti & Guzman, 1999; Kitsantas & Zimmerman, 1998), the age of the athlete (Allen & Howe, 1998; Bram & Feltz, 1995;), and gender (Allen & Howe, 1998; Amorose & Horn, 2000). Even so, the research does not appear to have fully explored all likely factors. For instance, not only do athletes vary according to their level of expertise and their degree of self-confidence in performing a task, but also personality factors are likely to impact how the athlete receives feedback and/or the development of self-efficacy. These factors appear to have been largely ignored in the sports literature. However, research in the area of health psychology has examined the relation between such factors as locus of control and perceived ability to affect ones health. Generally, those with a more internal locus of control who are given appropriate information about health behaviors are more likely to engage in healthy behaviors (Wheeler and Frank, 1988). It would seem that such a factor could also operate with athletes behaviors. In fact, the concept of task goal orientation versus ego goal orientation (Williams, 1994) appears to be very similar to the concept of locus of control. 2) Feedback should differ based on athlete's orientation. Williams (1994) examined the differences between task goal oriented athletes who prefer goal attainment, learning, and improving on past performance and ego goal oriented athletes who prefer social comparison with peers or through win-loss record. This researcher found a gender difference in that task oriented males preferred social comparison whereas task oriented females did not and concluded that the male preference for social comparison is not due to previous findings that males are more likely to be ego oriented and females more task oriented. This research begs the question of how the different orientations are related to self-efficacy which may be answered through the locus of control literature. Those with internal locus of control and task goal orientation tend to believe that effort and persistence are the ingredients of success whereas those with external locus of control and ego task orientation believe that success is the result of luck, fate, or innate ability (Wheeler and Frank, 1988; William, 1994). Summary of Link Between Feedback, Self-Efficacy, and Skill Development Overall, however, inferring from the available literature, there clearly appears to be a link between feedback in general, self-efficacy, and performance. Although intrinsic feedback promotes self-efficacy and performance, it is less clear if does so more effectively or to a greater degree than any other forms of feedback. This question cant be answered with the current state of the research although it certainly points in the direction of the importance of intrinsic feedback to the development of self-efficacy. It just doesnt indicate whether it is more valuable than extrinsic feedback. One major problem with the research is that a great deal of it is questionnaire research which has many problems in determining causality and makes it difficult to determine the role of ability in relation to self-efficacy and intrinsic feedback. The question of intrinsic feedback and the impact on self-efficacy is a more difficult question to study because Swinnen (1994) indicates that intrinsic feedback is more useful for enhancing performance of already learned material; therefore, an athlete would have to already have learned the basic skills through external feedback and then to learn methods of intrinsic feedback. The research becomes even more difficult considering that a comparison needs to be made between extrinsic feedback and intrinsic feedback with self-efficacy being assessed at different point in the process. However, I do believe that it is possible to conduct such research is a reasonable way and be able to answer this question. For instance, two groups of athletes could be taught two different but comparable skills from their sport. Once they have learned the basic skills, the teaching method for one skill would involve extrinsic feedback only and for the other skill they would be taught goal setting and self-assessment of their performance. This within subjects design would be powerful in terms of controlling for a number of extraneous variables such as differences in ability, gender, and age. Two groups would be needed so that one group learns through extrinsic feedback first and the other group through intrinsic feedback first to control for order effects and one type of feedback influencing the other. Since self-efficacy is focused on a specific skill it could be measured independently for each skill prior to learning, after having learned the basic skill but before the manipulated feedback, and then after each of the feedback conditions. Finally, the skills used need to be either very concrete in terms of outcome or judges need to determine the performance ability pre- and post-manipulation. In this way, the influence of intrinsic vs. extrinsic feedback on self-efficacy could be assessed and how that affects performance. References Allen, J.B. & Howe, B.L. (1998). Player ability, coach feedback, and female adolescent athletes perceived competence and satisfaction. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 20, 280-299. Amorose, A.J. & Horn, T.S. (2000). Intrinsic motivation: Relationships with collegiate athletes gender, scholarship status, and perceptions of their coaches behavior. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 22, 63-84. Amorose, A.J. & Weiss, M.R. (1998). Coaching feedback as a source of information about perceptions of ability: A developmental examination. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 20, 395-420. Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Bram, A.D. & Feltz, D.L. (1995). Effects of batting performance feedback on motivational factors and batting performance in youth baseball. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81, 1367-1378. Chase, M.A., Lirgg, C.D., & Feltz, D.L. (1997). Coaches behaviors conflict with those that evoke the best responses from athletes. The Sport Psychologist, 11, 8-22. Escarti, A. & Guzman, J.F. (1999). Effects of feedback on self-efficacy, performance, and choice in an athletic task. Jounal of Applied Sport Psychology, 11, 83-96. Kitsantas, A. & Zimmerman, B.J. (1998). Self-regulation of motoric learning: A strategic cycle view. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 10, 220-239. Shoenfelt, E. (1996). Goal setting and feedback as a posttraining strategy to increase the transfer of training. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 83, 176-178. Swinnen, S.P. (1996). Information feedback for motor skill learning: A review. In Advances in Motor Learning and Control, edited by H.N. Zelaznik. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. Tzetzis, G., Kioumourtzoglou, E., & Mavromatis, G. (1997). Goal setting and feedback for the development of instructional strategies. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84, 1411-1427. Wheeler, R.J. and Frank, M.A. (1988). Identification of stress buffers. Behavioral Medicine, 14, 78-89. Williams, L. (1994). Goal orientations and athletes preferences for competence information sources. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 16, 416-430. Zubiaur, M., Ona, A., & Delgado, J. (1999). Learning volleyball serves: A preliminary study of the effects of knowledge of performance and of results. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 89, 223-232. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles WHAT TO DO WHEN ANGER HURTS THOSE YOU LOVE by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Tweet "Managing your anger so that you don't hurt the ones you love takes determination and practice. However, your practice will pay off in many ways. Not only will you be less likely to hurt the ones you love, but you will feel a greater sense of inner peace from these methods as well as less guilt from your behavior. " Cindy knew that she should back off and not say anything. But she was angry about her husband's criticism. He was always telling her what to do and she was tired of him disrespecting her. She was quite capable of solving problems herself but he was so controlling. She believed that he didn't care if he hurt her but only that she did what he wanted. As a result, she wanted to lash back at him and hurt him. Another part of her, however, knew that she was over-reacting and that he was just trying to help. Yet, her anger won out and she started yelling at him about trying to control her! This escalated into an argument and avoidance of one another the rest of the day. Bruce had a stressful day at work. He was concerned about a project he was handling and that he needed to complete it in a timely manner because his promotion might depend on it. Yet, no matter what he did, everything seemed to go wrong. When he came home from work, his daughter and son were excited to see him and started clamoring for his attention. He tried to look at their drawings and answer their questions but they just wanted more and more from him. Finally, in frustration, he yelled at them to shut up! The children started crying and his wife became angry with him. As these examples show, anger often hurts the ones we love. Neither Cindy nor Bruce wanted to lash out at their loved ones but they couldn't control their reaction. Many people who have problems with anger regret their actions but they continue to hurt those they love. They often make promise after broken promise to themselves to stop the angry outbursts. Yet, again and again, they vent anger against the ones they love. Why Is Anger Difficult to Control? The process of releasing frustration through yelling at someone, throwing or hitting something, and other physical methods is a powerful reinforcer. When you engage in these behaviors you release pent-up energy which is the adrenaline that has built up in your system due to stress. This process may involve the depletion of the glycogen (glucose) stores in your system and the release of endorphins in your brain. What does this mean? And what does it have to do with reinforcing yelling and other non-productive releases of anger? 1) Adrenaline causes tension. Both muscular and emotional tension are created with the increase in adrenaline. When a person is stressed, the brain interprets the stress as a threat and it releases adrenaline to prepare for the threat. Adrenaline increases muscular tension so that the body is ready to react and it heightens the sensitivity to stimulation so the brain can quickly process information and make a decision. Unfortunately, if you are not being threatened physically and do not need to run or fight, all this tension and awareness is an unpleasant experience. Therefore, when we are unable to react we experience internal stress. And most of the time in our lives we are not being threatened physically, but mentally, which results in the body physically preparing to run or fight when neither of those options are viable. Yet, the body is prepared and doesn't have a way of releasing that energy. 2) Glycogen is stored energy. Along with producing adrenaline, our bodies draw on the glycogen stores to be ready to face a threat. We experience the increase in energy, but again, since there is no direct threat, we experience all this energy with no release. When we are not in a physically active situation, we are likely to interpret this energy negatively as agitation or anxiety. When a person engages in intense physical activity such as yelling, throwing, or hitting they deplete the glycogen stores. In other words, they are releasing the pent-up energy. 3) Endorphins relax and sooth the body. Engaging in the physical anger results in the release of endorphins. Endorphins are chemicals in the brain that have an analgesic, or pain-relieving, effect similar to morphine or oxycodone. When endorphins are released we are likely to experience increased relaxation and reduced sensitivity to stimulation. For more information, read: A Brief Primer On the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help The combination of these processes in which increased tension and energy is followed by soothing relaxation and reduced sensitivity is often experienced as pleasurable. This experience of pleasure is reinforcing. Reinforcing a behavior causes an increased likelihood of engaging in the behavior. Positive reinforcement is providing a reward that is likely to increase the behavior that is rewarded. However, the process involved in anger is classic negative reinforcement which is reinforcement of a behavior by the removable of something that is aversive. Negative reinforcement is often confused with punishment which is APPLYING something that is aversive. Instead, negative reinforcement is REMOVING something that is negative or unpleasant. In this case, the increased tension caused by the build up of adrenaline is unpleasant when there is no release of the tension. When a person engages in intense activity such as yelling, throwing, or hitting, they experience a reduction in energy and an increase in the soothing, pain-relieving brain chemicals. Therefore, the intense activity causes the REMOVAL of the unpleasant tension and over-stimulation. The final result is that the individual's behavior of yelling, throwing, hitting is reinforced which causes them to be more likely to engage in the same behavior the next time they are stressed and tense. Even though they may not want to behave this way, the body's automatic reactions have been reinforced to release the emotional tension by engaging in the same behavior. Can This Process Be Counter-Acted? Even though this has become an automatic process, it IS possible to change this process. However, it is necessary to use methods that will prevent the automatic behavior. As with any learned behavior, these methods will require practice to create new behavior. The automatic angry reaction was learned at some point and then has become reinforced over time. It is possible to change that reaction by learning how to manage the behavior. I will discuss specific methods of change, but first let's look at how we plan to change the automatic process. 1) Recognize it. By recognizing and understanding the process that occurs when you react with anger, you are more likely to learn how to control it. When you take responsibility for your behavior rather than blaming others, then you can make decisions to respond differently. Recognizing your anger process allows you to identify triggers to your anger and to develop a plan to deal with those triggers before your tension has increased to an unmanageable level. 2) Prevent the build-up of adrenaline. Once you identify triggers, you can use methods to prevent the build-up of tension caused by adrenaline. If you prevent the initial release of adrenaline, it is much more difficult to become angry and react in physically hurtful ways. 3) Release the built-up adrenaline in other ways. If you are unable to recognize triggers and prevent the build-up of adrenaline, other methods can be used to release your tension. Learning to recognize when you are tense and knowing which methods work best for you will help you to release the tension more appropriately. 4) Use other methods to soothe your system. By learning how to soothe your system using methods that release chemicals that relax the body, you are more likely to contain angry reactions. Although not as much is understood about the biology of the relaxation response as is known about the stress reaction, researchers are showing that a chemical process occurs in the body to reverse the effects of stress and produce relaxation (Bhasin, et al., 2013). Therefore, using other methods to control this process will reduce the effects of physical tension caused by adrenaline. What Are These Methods? 1) Cognitive Restructuring. This is a psychological term meaning changing thinking. Adrenaline is released because your brain perceives the situation as a threat. If you change your thinking so that you don't perceive the situation as threatening, it is less likely adrenaline will be released. In the example at the beginning of this article, Cindy was halfway to managing her anger. She recognized that her husband probably was just trying to help her. However, her thought process wasn't strong enough to counter-act the tension created by the adrenaline. To make her thought process stronger, she needs to work on it when she is not in the moment of anger. She needs to remind herself frequently that her husband is not trying to control her but trying to help her. By preparing herself in advance of a common situation, she is more likely to listen to that voice before she becomes out-of-control. A good method for changing thinking is using the Cognitive Diary (Excel At Life provides a Cognitive Diary app and articles about changing thinking). By writing down situations that occur and how to think differently about them as well as reviewing your diary frequently, you are more likely to be prepared to think differently when a similar situation occurs. Typically, each person has specific triggers so that it is more likely that similar situations rather than unique situations will occur in the future. Therefore, using the Cognitive Diary allows you to be prepared to handle those future situations. 2) Physical release of tension. Identify some methods you can use to release the physical tension. If you deplete the glycogen stores and do not feel the agitated energy, you are less likely to respond with angry behavior. Different methods may work better for different people. Exercise can release the tension more appropriately. However, exercise tends to work best if you are a regular exerciser. Otherwise, it may actually increase your physical discomfort causing you to be more likely to react in anger rather than less likely. Specific physical releases that allow you to direct your anger can be beneficial. For instance, in the example at the beginning of this article, Bruce was angry with his boss and work, not with his children. So having a release that focuses on work such as hitting a punching bag that he imagines is his boss is likely to release the tension so that he doesn't direct it towards his children. Some people throw things because it can be a good release of tension. However, it can also be hurtful if done around others or if you destroy things that are valuable to someone. Yet, you can get the same kind of release in a more appropriate way. For instance, you can have a stack of old magazines ready to tear up when you are angry. Or, you could hit a pillow with a bat. Or, you could have glass recyclables that you could break (you need to do this in a way that you won't hurt yourself). By having a private place to do this you can release the tension without hurting someone. 3) Engage in regular relaxation. The various relaxation methods help to increase the chemicals produced by the body to counter-act the stress reaction. Excel At Life provides numerous audios that you can download to learn these methods. These free audios teach guided imagery, breathing exercises, mindfulness training, and progressive muscle relaxation. In addition, Qi Gong videos are available. The relaxation methods work in two ways. First, by regularly practicing relaxation methods you are more likely to maintain a greater state of calm. It will be more difficult to become agitated when you already have the relaxation response chemicals in your system. Second, the regular practice will allow you to become more skilled at using the relaxation methods so that when you are more agitated you will know how to calm your system more quickly. Although I have briefly described these methods, the methods for controlling anger are not simply carried out. For instance, you may have heard Count to ten before you respond as a simple way of controlling anger. This is a fine method but it is really not so simple. It requires recognition of the triggers, prior practice with calming yourself, and ability to think differently about the situation. Managing your anger so that you don't hurt the ones you love takes determination and practice. However, your practice will pay off in many ways. Not only will you be less likely to hurt the ones you love, but you will feel a greater sense of inner peace from these methods as well as less guilt from your behavior. REFERENCES Bhasin, M.K., Dusek, J.A, Chang, B., Joseph, M.G., Denninger, J.W., Fricchione, G.L., Benson, H. and Libermann, T.A. (2013). Relaxation Response Induces Temporal Transcriptome Changes in Energy Metabolism, Insulin Secretion and Inflammatory Pathways, PLOS ONE, 8, www.plosone.org, e62817 Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Social Phobia by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. and Barbara G. Markway, Ph.D. "...social phobia is a critical factor to be addressed because the treatment for an individual with OCD and social phobia may need to vary from the standard cognitive-behavioral treatment approach to OCD." Tweet Janine is a 38-year-old married woman with two young children. She obsesses continuously about whether her house is neat and clean enough. She frequently stays up until three in the morning scrubbing and straightening. In addition, Janine is painfully shy and has few friends. She worries about what other people think of her and is terribly afraid of rejection. Some of her neighbors get together with their children to play in a nearby park or each others homes, but Janine never joins them. You may easily recognize that Janine has obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). What you may not recognize is that she has an additional anxiety disorder called social phobia. Janine is not alone; recent research (1) estimates that 24% of individuals diagnosed with OCD receive an additional diagnosis of social phobia. In fact, this study found that social phobia is the most common additional anxiety disorder diagnosis made for those individuals with OCD. * Having both of these anxiety disorders together can make your recovery more difficult. In this article, we will describe social phobia, explain how it can complicate treatment, and call your attention to four key issues in dealing with the combination of OCD and social phobia. WHAT IS SOCIAL PHOBIA? Social phobia is an anxiety disorder characterized by a persistent fear of criticism or negative evaluation from others. It is essentially a fear of disapproval. Once thought, like OCD, to be relatively rare, current research shows that social phobia significantly impairs the lives of 2-3% of the general U.S. population. Another 20% experience social anxiety, which is less severe, only because they are able to avoid the social situations they dread. Some people have what is known as a specific social phobia, in which they fear one or a number of situations such as eating or drinking in public, writing in public, or public speaking. Others have a generalized form of the disorder and fear many, if not all, social situations. Complete avoidance of the feared social situations is common, although some people engage in subtle forms of avoidance or endure social situations with great discomfort. While the prevailing clinical lore has suggested that social phobia is a relatively mild disorder, this is frequently not the case. People suffering with social phobia are often times quite disabled, unable to maintain jobs or long-term relationships, for example. HOW DO I KNOW IF I HAVE SOCIAL PHOBIA? A mental health professional who specializes with anxiety disorders should be able to help you assess whether or not you have social phobia in addition to OCD. One way to do this is to trace the path of your irrational thoughts. If the path leads to a fear of rejection, of social isolation, of judgment by others, or of ostracism that is not based in the reality of the situation, then some degree of social evaluative anxiety is present. Depending on the extent that this anxiety influences your behavior, it may be social phobia. Tracing the path of the irrational thoughts refers to a process in which you ask yourself, or a therapist asks you, "What would happen then?" in response to the report of fear. For example, if an individual with OCD states, "I am afraid of being contaminated," the interviewer then asks, "What would happen then?" The individual may respond, "I'm afraid I'll get sick." "What would happen then?" "I might die." At this point the interviewer has uncovered the innermost fear and the questioning terminates. The deepest fears of people with OCD are typically of death, rejection, loss of control, or harm to oneself or someone else. For someone with social phobia in addition to OCD, the above scenario might be played out differently. The individual may still state, "I am afraid of being contaminated," but may respond, "I'm afraid I won't be perfect," to the inquiry. "What would happen then?" "Other people won't approve of me." "What would happen then?" "They would reject me and I'll be alone." As you can see, the surface fear may be very similar, but the underlying fear is different. In such a case, even the surface behavior may be similar. For instance, both individuals may avoid contaminated items and engage in extensive cleaning or washing rituals. As a result, the OCD may easily be diagnosed. However, the OC behavior and avoidance may hide the social phobia. In our experience, if the social phobia diagnosis is missed, it may wreak havoc with the treatment plan. CANT I DEAL WITH THE SOCIAL PHOBIA LATER? You may wonder why diagnosing and addressing social phobia is important to your treatment. Why cant the treatment of OCD and social phobia be separate processes? In our experience, social phobia appears to interact with OCD in a manner that necessitates attention to both disorders simultaneously. One way that this interaction occurs is that obsessions and compulsions may protect the individual from more threatening social fears. As unpleasant and frustrating as the obsessions and compulsions may be, having to face a high anxiety-producing social situation may be even worse. For example, a woman with these two disorders may be invited to attend a social function. Even though she may want to attend, she is very fearful of the situation and the potential for rejection. Her obsessions about the fear of harming someone cause her to avoid the situation, and thus, protect her from experiencing the social anxiety. You may wonder if OCD causes the social fears and isolation because of the bizarreness of the behavior and the concern about what others may think. Perhaps if the OCD is treated, the social fears and isolation will disappear. While this may be the case in some situations, research shows that social phobia tends to develop, on average, at an earlier age than OCD. Additionally, most of the people we have treated report that their social fears occurred prior to the development of OCD. This corroborates our opinion that the obsessions and compulsions may develop in response to social evaluative anxiety. From our experience, the most severe cases of OCD are in combination with social phobia. Our perspective may be due to some uniqueness in the populations we treat. For instance, we tend to be referred severely disabled individuals who have not benefited from treatment numerous times previously. We have observed that the severity of the OCD appears to increase with the degree of perfectionism. For those with the combination of these two disorders, the perfectionism tends to be overvalued. In other words, the individual accepts the perfectionistic beliefs as normal and rational. For example, as described above, the woman with social phobia may believe that she truly will be rejected by others if she isnt perfect. These issues are more than philosophical questions for discussion. We believe that social phobia is a critical factor to be addressed because the treatment for an individual with OCD and social phobia may need to vary from the standard cognitive-behavioral treatment approach to OCD. In any psychotherapy, it is the underlying fear that needs to be addressed in order for substantial changes to occur. Therefore, for some individuals, it is the social phobia that establishes the direction for treatment. If this direction is not pursued, the therapist and client may arrive at the premature and/or erroneous conclusion that cognitive-behavioral therapy is not effective. KEY ISSUES TO CONSIDER IN DEALING WITH THE COMBINATION OF OCD AND SOCIAL PHOBIA Given the above inferences, we will now present four treatment issues that you and your therapist may need to consider in dealing with the combination of OCD and social phobia. The following points are to be considered in addition to the standard cognitive-behavioral treatment for OCD. 1) Recognize the Importance of the Therapeutic Relationshi If you have social phobia, you desire relationships with other people, but are very fearful of possible rejection or disapproval. This is true even in your relationship with your therapist. Before you can make progress in treatment, you need to feel comfortable enough in the relationship that you know your therapist will not reject you for making a mistake or for getting angry, for example. The development of this therapeutic relationship can be a slow process for many people, but especially for those with intense social fears. This is a critical point, as sometimes therapists will tell clients who are not completing their behavioral assignments that they are not ready for treatment and end treatment. Such a stance can be devastating for a client with social phobia. If the client feels rejected by the therapist, he or she may become even more sensitized to the fear of rejection and avoid further treatment opportunities. The therapist needs to recognize that although an individual may not be ready for behavioral assignments, he or she may still need therapy to address irrational beliefs regarding social situations. As these beliefs are challenged and the individual becomes more comfortable in the therapeutic situation, then he or she may be able to engage in the tasks addressing the obsessions and compulsions and/or social avoidance. 2) Be Flexible with the Level of Intensity of Treatment If you have social phobia and OCD, you may have difficulty initially tolerating the intense treatment that is sometimes recommended. We define intensity on a continuum with the least intense treatment being once per week outpatient sessions and the most intense being hospitalization or full-time day treatment. At Behavioral Consultants, P.C., we have designed our day treatment to be flexible enough to adjust the intensity of treatment. For example, an individual with both OCD and social phobia was frightened of treatment after having been in an intense inpatient program several years previously. To allow him to become comfortable with the process of treatment, we recommended three half-days per week primarily focused on coping with his social anxiety. Eventually, he was able to increase the intensity of treatment and focus more on the exposures with response prevention. Of course, decreasing the intensity of treatment may increase the length of treatment. It is important that the client understands that it is necessary to proceed more slowly so as to allow significant progress. Cognitive therapy can assist in addressing the perfectionistic belief that therapy must proceed quickly in order to be considered successful. 3) Pay Attention to Social Skills Many of our clients who have been isolating themselves because of social evaluative anxiety have not had much experience with social interactions. Therefore, they may have skills deficits particularly in the areas of communication, assertion, and conflict resolution. If this is the case for you, it will be important that these deficits be identified and that you learn the necessary skills as a part of your treatment. Although many individuals with OCD alone may also need skills training, the deficits appear to be more severe when OCD occurs together with social phobia. 4) Focus on Social Exposures In addition to the exposures related to your obsessions, your treatment will also need to include plenty of exposures targeting your social fears. Such exposures may range from simply talking to a staff member to taking a walk in a mall to deliberately making a mistake in public. The interested reader may want to refer to an insightful article by Butler (2), which describes common pitfalls in conducting social exposures. For example, there are characteristics inherent in many social situations (for example, they can be brief, unpredictable, and difficult to repeat) that can make conducting typical graduated exposure therapy challenging. In conclusion, we recognize the limitations of our inferences as there has been no research published in the area of the treatment of the combination of OCD and social phobia. However, the above considerations have been effective in our practices and we hope to stimulate more research in this area. If you think you may have social phobia in addition to OCD, be sure and bring this issue up with your mental health professional. Theres every reason to believe that with careful attention to these treatment issues outlined that you can not only recover from your OCD, but from your social fears, as well. * A disorder believed to be related to OCD, Body Dysmorphic Disorder, may also share an overlap with social phobia. Although we have not seen any research on this specifically, we have observed such an overlap in our practices. The comments we make in this article may also pertain to those individuals with BDD and social phobia. References Brown, T.A. & Barlow, D.H. (1992). Comorbidity among anxiety disorders: implications for treatment and DSM-IV. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 835-844. Butler, G. (1985). Exposure as a treatment for social phobia: some instructive difficulties. Behavior Research and Therapy, 23, 651-657. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem--Index by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. INDEX Step 1. Recognize That Self-esteem is Self-imposed--page 1 Step 2. Write Your Life Script--page 2 Step 3. Examine Your Self-Labels--page 3 Step 4. Start Reducing Your Self-labeling--page 4 Step 5. Create Daily Affirmations--page 5 Step 6. Be Courteous in Your Self-talk--page 6 Step 7. Accept Compliments and Stop Apologizing--page 7 Step 8. Hold Your Head Up--page 8 Step 9. Make Eye Contact and Smile--page 9 Step 10. Say "Hello"--page 10 Step 11. Don't Evaluate Yourself Based on Others--page 11 Step 12. Focus on Other People--page 12 Step 13. Be Direct--page 13 Step 14. Internalize Positive Responses--page 14 Step 15. Accept Failure--page 15 Step 16. Visualize Success--page 16 Step 17. Mentally Rehearse--page 17 Step 18. Act with Confidence--page 18 Step 19. Redefine Rejection--page 19 Step 20. Re-write Your Life Script--page 20 Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Positive Generalization Scale The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses the tendency to have positive expectations based upon previous experience. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: The Secret to Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions Happiness is an Attitude Happy Friends Can Improve Your Health Can a Gratitude List Make a Difference in Your Life? Managing Adversity Improves the Outcome of Happiness Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Why You Don't Need to Be Happy Buying Happiness: It Can Be Done! Not Happy? Just Wait... Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong The Danger of Seeking Happiness: How to Protect Your Children The Pursuit of Happiness or the Pursuit of Money? Can't Force Happiness on Someone Money May Not Buy Happiness, But How You Spend Money May Help Want to Live a Long and Happy Life? Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! Intelligence, Health and Happiness Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You More questionnaires: List of PsychTests Your Happiness Assessment Self-Esteem Self-Efficacy For authors and more information: Carver, C. S., & Johnson, S. L. (2009). Tendencies toward mania and tendencies toward depression have distinct motivational, affective, and cognitive correlates. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 33, 552-569. Eisner, L. R., Johnson, S. L., & Carver, C. S. (2008). Cognitive responses to failure and success relate uniquely to bipolar depression versus mania. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 154-163. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Wellness Audio Articles The following articles have audio versions: WHY ARE MEDITATIVE RELAXATION AND MINDFULNESS IMPORTANT? Discusses the relaxation and different methods. Good introduction before using relaxation and mindfulness audios. MOBILIZING YOUR BODY'S RESOURCES: HEALING FROM ILLNESS OR INJURY Discusses the impact of stress and how to cope with it. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Cognitive Styles Test The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. The Cognitive Styles Test measures 13 irrational styles of thinking that can create or contribute to life problems including depression, anxiety, anger, relationship difficulties, motivational issues. This test provides information to help you learn about yourself and to work on self-improvement. Irrational styles of thinking refers to the concept from cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) that problem behavior and many symptoms of stress occur due to our thought processes. By learning about your irrational thinking you can learn to change it. This site does not save results. If you have an Android device, you may download the Know Yourself Personality Tests app to take the test and your results will be saved in the app. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: How do we Change Irrational Thinking? Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Coping With Change: Psychological Flexibility Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Making Attributions for a Healthier Attitude List of Cognitive Styles Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Danger: Negativity Ahead Use Your Head! And Your Heart! Excellence vs. Perfection But It Happened Before! When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Read Books, Not Minds To Should? Or, Not To Should? Demand Thinking More questionnaires: Self-Efficacy List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R., & Gough, H. C. (2006). The International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84-96. International Personality Item Pool: A Scientific Collaboratory for the Development of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences (http://ipip.ori.org/). Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Free Audios! Share Tweet Imagery Relaxation Audios Meditation Audios Energizing Audios Motivational Audios Relaxation Audios for Children Education and Assistance Audios Anxiety Assistance Audios Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Assistance Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Assistance Audios Self-Esteem Audios Emotion Training Audios Quick Stress Relief and Muscle Relaxation SportPsych Training Weight Control Audios Mindfulness Practice Imagery Relaxation What is imagery relaxation? Imagery relaxation focuses on teaching the three main methods of relaxation: slow, relaxed breathing muscle relaxation guided imagery How to use these audios Find a quiet place, sit or lie down comfortably, and just listen Choose imagery you think you might like Different audios offer different experiences Listening to the same audio again and again may uncover layers of experience Relaxation audios Rainy Autumn Morning Relaxation Hot Springs Relaxation Riding a Horse Across the Plains Relaxation Cityscape Mindfulness Sunrise on the Beach Mindfulness Tropical Garden Mindfulness The Great Desert Mindfulness Day of Fishing Mindfulness The Meadow Relaxtion Mountain Cabin Relaxation Day on the Farm Mindfulness Lotus Flower Relaxation Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Hot Air Balloon Motivation Starry Night Relaxation Meditation These audios use the meditation techniques from Buddhist psychology which uses the methods from Buddhism for life enhancement. As such, they are not religiously based but focused on changing thinking about ourselves and others to provide greater peace and contentment. Loving Kindness Meditation Compassion Meditation Pathways Meditation Yogic Breath Training Energizing The following audios are to help increase energy. Wake Up Mindfulness Energizing the Body and Mind Mindful Breathing Stretching Motivational These audios focus on improving your life by changing your attitude and removing obstacles in your thinking. Choosing Happiness Change Yourself--Don't Wait for the World to Change Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight Hot Air Balloon Motivation Risk and Planning for Success Aging with Integrity Finding Your Path Decision-making Relaxation Stories for Children Not just for children, but for the young at heart, these relaxation stories help children learn how to calm themselves. They are great for helping children fall asleep more peacefully at night. Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Bouncing Ball Mindfulness Magic Book Magic Bubbles Magical Forest Cloud Castles Education and Assistance The education and assistance audios are to help you understand and cope with different problems you might be experiencing. 5 Methods to Managing Anger Aging with Integrity The Irresponsibility of Dependency Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education Rational Thinking Anxiety Assistance The anxiety assistance audios are to help cope with general anxiety and panic. Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Panic Assistance Mindful Grounding Social Anxiety Assistance Stress Education Rational Thinking The Worry Box Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Assistance The anxiety assistance audios are to help cope with general anxiety and panic. Mindful Grounding Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Lies You Were Taught as a Child Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Building Blocks Emotion Training Obsessive Compulsive Disorder Assistance The assistance audios are to help you with changing some of the underlying thinking that is involved with OCD. Excessive Responsibility and OCD Probability and OCD OCD Intrusive Thoughts Reassurance Magical Thinking and OCD Self-esteem Assistance The self-esteem audios are to help you improve your self-concept and self-esteem so that you feel better about yourself and are better able to cope with life's challenges. Self-Esteem Full Version Self-Esteem Self-Talk Self-Esteem Train Self-Esteem Blackboard Rational Thinking Emotion Training Emotion training audios can be particularly useful for those with anxiety disorders such as Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Panic Disorder as well as for many of those with Borderline Personality Disorder. Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Building Blocks Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief and Muscle Relaxation Audios that teach methods to help you with quick stress relief throughout the day. Once you learn these methods, you can use them frequently to help manage stress symptoms. Autogenic Relaxation Training Mindful Breathing Muscle Scan Tense and Release Stretching Progressive Muscle Relaxation SportPsych Training The following audios are to assist with athletic performance. They can also be used for other types of performance. In addition to the following, the Mindfulness Practice Audios can be very helpful to improving athletic performance through mindful awareness. Sport Motivation Intensity Training Sport Imagery Exercise Energizing the Body and Mind Weight Control These audios focus on changing thinking related to problems with weight control. Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight Creating Awareness of Overeating Consequences Risk and Planning for Success Hot Air Balloon Motivation Mindfulness Practice Understanding Mindfulness: Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Understanding Mindfulness: Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Understanding Mindfulness: Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Understanding Mindfulness: Step 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Understanding Mindfulness: Step 5--Mindfulness and Grief Additional reading: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Mindfulness Practice Exercises Mindfulness Exercise 1: Eating a Piece of Fruit Mindfulness Exercise 2: Eating a Piece of Chocolate Mindfulness Exercise 3: Doing the Dishes Mindfulness Exercise 4: Eating a Crunchy Vegetable Mindfulness Exercise 5: Sitting Mindfulness Exercise 6: An Itch Mindfulness Exercise 7: Stretching Mindfulness Exercise 8: Walking Mindfulness Exercise 9: Feeling the Air Mindfulness Exercise 10: Engaged in Conversation Mindfulness Exercise 11: Reading a Book Mindfulness Exercise 12: Closing Your Eyes Mindfulness Exercise 13: Listening Mindfulness Exercise 14: Feeling Heat Mindfulness Exercise 15: Feeling Cold Mindfulness Exercise 16: Doing an Unpleasant Chore Mindfulness Exercise 17: Touching a Door Knob Mindfulness Exercise 18: Getting Dressed Mindfulness Exercise 19: Experiencing Rain Mindfulness Exercise 20: Experiencing a Neutral Object Mindfulness Exercise 21: Digging in the Garden Mindfulness Exercise 22: Walking Up Stairs Mindfulness Exercise 23: Lifting Weights Mindfulness Exercise 24: Lying Down Mindfulness Exercise 25: Drifting to Sleep Mindfulness Exercise 26: Exercise to Exhaustion Mindfulness Exercise 27: Feeling Bored Mindfulness Exercise 28: Feeling Excitement Mindfulness Exercise 29: Feeling Loneliness Mindfulness Exercise 30: Feeling Disappointment Mindfulness Exercise 31: Feeling Embarrassed Mindfulness Exercise 32: Feeling Frustrated Mindfulness Exercise 33: Feeling Sadness Mindfulness Exercise 34: Feeling Helpless Mindfulness Exercise 35: Feeling Remorse Mindfulness Exercise 36: Feeling Apprehension Professionally Recorded at: Revolution Sound Design Studios Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...we go through extreme contortions to try to protect ourselves from the possibility of loss and pain. Yet, these attempts to protect ourselves may actually be the means with which we destroy that which we are trying to preserve." Tweet What is Irrational Jealousy? Frequently, I am asked how to handle irrational jealous feelings. Usually, the individual recognizes that her feelings are unreasonable with no valid evidence but feels incapable of controlling the jealousy. In addition, the person usually recognizes the destructive nature of indulging in the feelings and the resulting behavior. Such behavior typically involves excessive questioning of her spouse, suspiciousness, and accusations. Many spouses become extremely frustrated with this behavior because they have no way of proving their faithfulness. This leads to an escalating cycle of anger which is used as further evidence by the jealous spouse that her suspicions are correct. The jealous spouse often desperately wants to stop the behavior but finds that he can't control the thoughts which makes him feel miserable. He believes that if he can just prove his suspicions one way or another, he will feel better. The unfortunate fallacy in this thinking, is that trust can never be proven; it can only be disproved. The definition of trust is the belief that something is true. Therefore, without evidence to the contrary, if we want a satisfying relationship, we have to choose to trust the person we love. One of the most difficult things for human beings, in general, is not knowing something with 100% certainty. We are often afraid to trust because we are fearful of disappointment and hurt. Therefore, we go through extreme contortions to try to protect ourselves from the possibility of loss and pain. Yet, these attempts to protect ourselves may actually be the means with which we destroy that which we are trying to preserve. In other words, a woman may eventually destroy her marriage because she is too fearful to take the chance of trusting that her husband is faithful. As a result, she causes the loss and pain that she was trying to prevent. What Causes Irrational Jealousy? For a person to learn to control jealousy, it is first important to understand what underlies the irrational thinking. Frequently, an individual who is prone to irrational jealousy may have problems with low self-esteem, feelings of insecurity, fear of vulnerability, or fear of abandonment.A person with low self-esteem may feel so undeserving of being loved, that he can't believe that his spouse could possibly remain faithful to him. Perhaps these feelings stem from some abusive past relationship in which he was unloved and made to believe that he was at fault. For instance, if a teenager is told, "If only you were more like your brother, then maybe you could get a girlfriend" he comes to believe that there is something wrong with him. Many times we are given messages, some subtle and some not-so-subtle, as we are growing up that shape our beliefs about ourselves. Feelings of insecurity may stem from the low self-esteem or may be related to instances in which we have previously been hurt. The same is true with fear of abandonment. When we have experienced profound loss from which we haven't had an opportunity to recover, we may develop an extreme fear and avoidance reaction to similar circumstances. However, as indicated earlier, this avoidance may bring about the abandonment that we fear. Fear of vulnerability is the inability to let our guard down, to let another person know us completely. This fear usually derives from a fear of rejection due to the belief that if we let someone else truly know us, we will ultimately be rejected. Again, the fallacy in this belief, is that if we don't allow our spouse to know us, if we don't allow ourselves to be vulnerable, we are preventing the development of emotional intimacy which is essential to any relationship. Emotional intimacy is the most important type of intimacy in a relationship. It is required for the relationship to fully mature. Without it, all we have is the initial surface attraction to the other person which cannot be maintained indefinitely. However, when we find emotional intimacy with another person, we discover the most intensely fulfilling experience that exists. And that is, the full acceptance of our self by another person. I know some people may argue with me and say that "the most intensely fulfilling experience that exists" is our relationship with God. The reason I say that it is the development of emotional intimacy with another person, is because acceptance from God is a given and doesn't require as much of a risk. Finally, the individual needs to determine if there are certain behaviors from herself or from her spouse that may contribute to the development of these fears and beliefs. For instance, perhaps a spouse is reluctant to share personal information because he will then be subject to questioning and accusations. As a result, emotional intimacy in the relationship declines. The person who is jealous will often take this as further evidence of cheating in the relationship, when, in fact, it is a result of the questioning and accusations. Or, for example, a jealous person has repeatedly harmed relationships through his accusations which he takes as evidence that women can never be trusted. The more you are aware of your behaviors and other's behavior that may maintain the beliefs, then you will be able to make better choices that can allow you to control the jealousy. In fact, the development of awareness can't be emphasized enough. You may need to spend some time at this point to assess your jealousy, the behaviors, and the outcomes based on the behaviors. How Do You Stop Irrational Jealousy? Once you have determined the behavior, then you can make choices to change the behavior. Even though these feelings seem uncontrollable, that doesn't mean they are uncontrollable. However, you may need to make a commitment to the hard work involved in making changes. The following steps can help you with these changes: Step 1. Stop jealous behaviors. If you are questioning or making accusations, stop the behavior immediately. Whether you need to literally bite your tongue, go to another room, or talk to a friend, don't allow yourself to continue with this destructive behavior. Usually people engage in this behavior because initially it is reassuring to them and makes them feel better. But remind yourself that feeling better is just temporary and that it is a destructive behavior that must stop. Changing emotions or how you feel about yourself is a difficult task that takes time. You need to learn to identify the problem areas and then challenge them over an extended period of time to see change. However, what you need to consider is that the most destructive thing to your relationship is your jealous behaviors. These can be addressed immediately even if you haven't changed the underlying causes of the jealousy. Therefore, the first step is to identify the jealous behaviors. Make a list of the behaviors in which you engage that create problems in your relationship. If possible, talk to your significant other and find out what bothers him or her. Some behaviors to consider are: 1) Do you question your spouse in detail about his or her day looking for discrepancies? Even if you think you are being clever in how you phrase your questions, your spouse will catch on to what you are doing and it will be an irritant. 2) Do you accuse him or her of paying too much attention to someone else or of looking at some attractive person? 3) Do you question him or her in detail about past relationships? Sometimes people do this under the guise of full disclosure or honesty but it will be clear to your spouse that you are just feeding your jealousy. 4) Do you check emails and phone records? Do you then question about unknown numbers and require proof about the identity of the person? 5) Do you control with whom your spouse can associate? 6) Do you sabotage your partner's efforts to look attractive? For example, if she is on a diet and you bring home junk food. 7) Do you belittle your partner and try to make him or her believe that no one else could love him/her the way you do? The above are just some of the common destructive behaviors. Try to identify your behaviors specifically. If you have trouble with this you could even keep a journal (which can even be a piece of paper you keep with you) and whenever you notice a behavior, write it down. Sometimes to notice a behavior you may first notice the outcome of a behavior such as an argument. So, you might write down every time you argue and try to determine what behavior preceded the argument. Once you have identified the behaviors, try to include other specifics about the behavior such as: 1) When did the behavior occur? 2) What happened right before the behavior? 3) What was your emotional state right before the behavior? 4) What was your emotional state after the behavior? 5) Was there some reinforcement of the behavior? For example, did you have make-up sex after the argument? Not all of these questions will provide useful information. However, you want to look at your answers to determine any patterns that might occur. For instance, if you noticed that you tend to engage in the behavior when you've had a stressful day at work, then that pattern would tell you to be on the look-out for the behavior after work. Or if you notice that you tend to engage in the behavior after you and your spouse have attended a party, then you know you need to be careful after a party. Once you have identified the behaviors and when and how they are likely to occur, you need to make a plan to stop the behaviors. If you have identified a certain pattern when they are likely to occur, you could try changing your routine. For example, if it occurs when you've been stressed at work, you might talk with a friend to unwind or you might go play racquetball to work off the stress. If you are questioning or making accusations, you may need to be very firm with yourself and tell yourself to "Stop." Once will not be enough. You will need to keep reminding yourself. Also, remind yourself of how the behavior is hurting your relationship. Have someone you can call when you are having trouble resisting. For some people, depending on your relationship, your spouse might be able to assist you. For example, you could tell your spouse not to answer your questions or to walk away. However, ultimately, it is important for you to take control of your behavior. When people change behaviors, they often believe that the change should be reward enough. However, the jealous behaviors are often very powerfully reinforcing so you need something to counteract that reinforcement. So, when you are doing well or you resisted an urge to engage in the jealous behaviors, give yourself a reward. Rewards can vary according to each person so it may be a good idea of making a list of things you can do to reward yourself. And, if your spouse is willing, have him or her give you a pat on the back as well. Finally, one very important factor regarding changing behaviors needs to be addressed. So often, I have clients who tell me that they complained to their spouse about jealousy and he or she changed for a period of time. But then they reverted back to the same behaviors. The typical reason this occurs is because all the individual did was to change the behaviors. Without changing the underlying cause of the behaviors such as the self-esteem or fear of abandonment, the behaviors are likely to return because the individual is still in an emotional state of distress. So, in other words, it is not enough to change just the behaviors, you need to take the other steps I've outlined as well. Step 2. Challenge Irrational Thoughts. Identify how your thinking is irrational and remind yourself of why it is whenever you have the jealous thoughts. If is often beneficial to write this down. Some things that you may identify include the idea that there is no evidence, that the probability is remote, and that there is evidence to the contrary such as the loving things your spouse does for you. Underlying the jealous emotions and behavior are the irrational thoughts. Before you can change the emotions you need to identify, challenge, and change these thoughts. One of the most common types of thought distortions that plays a role in irrational jealousy is the fixed desire. A fixed desire is any kind of belief that demands a certain outcome for the person to be happy. For example, "I must get a promotion at work or I'll be a failure." In this case, the individual's contentment with him or herself is based on obtaining a promotion. Fixed desires are typically externally based which means that a person is giving control of his/her happiness to something or someone else over which he/she may not have control. Take the above example. What if this person has an unreasonable boss who won't give the desired promotion? But the individual continues to believe that he/she is a failure without it. In this case, nothing he/she can do will change this feeling because it is out of his/her control. A fixed desire is different from a desire or a goal. In the above example, an individual can desire a promotion but does not have to base his/her self-concept and happiness upon obtaining the goal. Therefore, it is not a demand and he/she can feel okay whether or not the promotion is obtained. "I prefer to get a promotion. However, even without it I know I'm a competent employee." How does this work with irrational jealousy? A jealous person may have a belief such as "This person must love me or I can't be happy." This type of belief is a demand that potentially leads to thoughts such as "I must make this person love me" or "I must make sure he/she doesn't leave me." These thoughts then will lead to attempts to control the other person or to other jealous behaviors such as suspiciousness and questioning. If you tend to have fixed desires, you may believe that this thinking is perfectly reasonable. You might be thinking, "Why wouldn't I want to make sure this person loves me?" Again, there is a difference between a desire and a fixed desire (demand). The more you demand love the less likely you are to obtain it especially since the concept of true love is that it is freely given. However, if you are acting on a desire you are more likely to focus on your behavior rather than the other person's behavior. For example, you are less likely to be questioning the whereabouts of your loved one and more likely to be demonstrating your love through caring behaviors. Such behavior is much more effective in obtaining and securing love than jealous behaviors are. The bottom line, anyway, when it comes to whether someone loves you, is that it is outside of your control. Someone else's love is their choice, not yours. If someone you love does not love you, it does not mean that there is something wrong with you or that you are unlovable. It just means it was not a good fit. A good way to identify irrational thinking is to write down your thoughts when you are feeling jealous. Try to be specific and try to identify the deepest thoughts possible. For instance, if you think: "I want him/her to love me." Ask yourself "What if he/she doesn't?" "I don't want him/her to leave me?" Then ask yourself "What if she/he does?" "I'll be all alone" "So what if you're all alone?" "I'll be sad." "So what if you're sad?" "I won't be able to stand it." "And what if you can't stand it?" "What's the point in living then?" By having this type of conversation with yourself you can identify the thinking at the deeper levels that contribute to the irrational jealousy. In this case, the person is identifying fear of abandonment, inability to tolerate negative emotions, and catastrophic predictions. Once you identify the source of the thinking you can then begin to challenge the accuracy of these thoughts. For instance, a catastrophic prediction is the belief that the worst case scenario will occur. What is the likelihood that the worst case scenario will occur? You might believe that since other people have left you it is likely that your current spouse will leave you. Is that accurate? Is this person the same as previous people you've with whom you've had relationships? Is this person likely to cheat on you? If your answer is truly "yes" then there may be a problem with how you are choosing partners. Otherwise, it is important to recognize that aside from your jealous behaviors causing the person to leave, the catastrophic prediction is not likely to be accurate. The inability to tolerate negative emotions, especially sadness and loneliness, is common with irrational jealousy. Often people believe that these emotions will never end and they don't want to feel sad or lonely forever. However, the grief process is time-limited if we allow ourselves to fully feel the grief. When we work through the emotions by experiencing them rather than avoiding them we are able to resolve the grief. Frequently, though, due to fear of experiencing the unpleasant emotions, individuals will become stuck in the grief especially the anger stage of grief. Anger is a self-protective emotion that is often easier for people than the overwhelming sadness. However, some people may be uncomfortable with anger and they may become stuck in the bargaining stage such as believing they can still work it out. These are just a couple of the ways that inaccurate thinking can occur. However, once you have identified the inaccuracies in your thinking, the next step is to remind yourself frequently of how your thinking is inaccurate. Sometimes it is useful to even write down the more accurate thinking and carry it with you so you can read it frequently. The more often you engage in the accurate thinking, the more quickly your thinking will change. Try an experiment: before you start to change your thinking, spend a day counting each time you have a jealous thought--not each episode of jealousy, but each specific thought. For many people, this will add up into the hundreds. When you have obtained this baseline, you will have an idea of how many times you need to repeat the accurate thoughts to yourself each day because it needs to approximate this number. Another way to obtain the necessary repetition is to record the accurate thoughts and then listen to them over and over. As you achieve enough repetition, you will notice that your automatic thoughts will start to change. This is not a simple process. However, it is like any new skill you want to learn. You can't expect to drive a car without learning how and then practicing. the same is true of changing thinking: we need to learn the method and then practice. Step 3. Stop Jealous Self-Talk Refuse to engage in the jealous self-talk. Whenever you engage in the jealous self-talk, internally tell yourself to "shut up." You may need to do this repeatedly, but you want to do whatever is necessary to not listen to yourself on this topic. Some people use the rubber band method which involves the aversive stimulus of snapping a rubber band on your wrist whenever you have the jealous self-talk. If you worked through the above exercise involving identifying the irrational self-talk about the jealousy, you have probably identified some statements that occur frequently. Sometimes there may not be a clear statement, but instead, you may have images. Frequently, jealous people will have images of their loved one with another person. Images are often more powerful than the thoughts and can easily occur with great frequency. Once you have identified the jealous self-talk or the jealous images, it is important to reduce the frequency of these thoughts. The more you allow these thoughts or images, the more you reinforce your belief in them and they appear more real to you. Images are especially powerful in this regard. So, for many people it is not enough to just identify the irrational thoughts and challenge their accuracy, it is also crucial to work on stopping the irrational thoughts and images. The techniques that help do this are called "thought-stopping techniques" and they can take a variety of forms. You might try several different ones to determine what works best for you or you might develop one that works according to your best reinforcement style. For instance, a person who is strongly visual and is being distressed by images causing jealousy, may try to picture a stop sign or a big "X" whenever the images occur. This procedure can even be reinforced initially by using an actual picture of a stop sign that you look at whenever you have the images. In addition, you could practice the thought-stopping by spending 20 minutes a day deliberately creating the images in your mind and then immediately stopping them by looking at the stop sign and visualizing it. So in a single practice session you could create the image a hundred times and stop it with the visual stop sign. The purpose of this exercise is that when the image should occur unexpectedly, you will be more prepared for it. Another technique is to firmly tell yourself "Stop!" whenever a jealous thought occurs. Again, you could do similar practice sessions of deliberately creating the thought and telling yourself "Stop!" immediately afterward. If the "Stop!" isn't enough to disrupt the thought process, you may try saying it aloud during your practice sessions or pair it with a loud obnoxious noise like a whistle. The pairing will allow you to disrupt the thought so that eventually just thinking "Stop!" will be enough. Another technique is the rubber band technique which involves wearing a rubber band on your wrist and snapping it whenever you have a jealous thought or image. All of these techniques are considered aversive conditioning techniques and the rubber band technique is the most aversive since it involves a mild pain stimulus. The purpose of aversive conditioning techniques is to teach your brain that is not okay to engage in the jealous thinking or images. Therefore, you prevent your brain from traveling down that automatic pathway of jealous thoughts and images. You are creating a choice for yourself. Step 4. Improve Self-Esteem Remember that irrational jealousy is not about your spouse but is about yourself. Use the presence of jealous feelings to remind yourself that you need to focus on improving your self-esteem. Although improving self-esteem is another entire topic to itself, generally, you need to give yourself positive self-statements and engage in behaviors that make you feel good about yourself. Improving self-esteem is obviously an extensive topic. Many individuals who experience irrational jealousy may not recognize the self-esteem issues. This may particularly be the case when they are over-compensating with perfectionistic tendencies. However, if you listen to yourself, how often are you demanding and self-critical? If you are not aware of being self-critical, how often are you critical of others? Often, our criticisms of others can provide us with clues about our expectations for ourselves. Some individuals may even argue that these expectations are reasonable and a minimal requirement for human beings. If you find yourself in that category, you may first need to address perfectionistic demands and start challenging what is reasonable before you can address the self-esteem issues. However, if you have already started the first three steps towards dealing with irrational jealousy, you are also beginning to address the self-esteem issues. To address these issues more in-depth would take a book. In fact, the best technique I have found is in the book "Self-Esteem" by Matthew McKay. The first three chapters provide an overview of understanding the pathological critic and the fourth chapter provides an excellent exercise that addresses changing the self-esteem. It involves writing down all your strengths and weaknesses in seven different areas of self-esteem. Then, you re-word the negatives to make them more neutral or even positive such as you might do for a job resume. Finally, you write a detailed description of yourself based on these re-worded attributes, and again, use the technique of repetition to change your thinking about yourself by reading this description daily or more. Also, read 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem. Step 5. Learn to be vulnerable and to develop emotional intimacy. For any relationship to be successful, you must be able to take risks. There are many ways to do this and you need to determine by assessing yourself what are the best ways for you to take risks. For instance, if you feel insecure, you might share these feelings with your spouse and talk about ways your spouse can help you feel more secure. Or if you are afraid of being vulnerable, you might decide to take small risks of sharing yourself, your feelings, and your fears with your spouse. Sometimes the process of developing awareness and challenging irrational beliefs may be too difficult to accomplish alone and a person may need assistance from a therapist. However, typically a good cognitive-behavioral therapist can point you in the right direction within a few sessions and then most of the work is up to you. Copyright 2000, 2009 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. and www.excelatlife.com Permission to reprint this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Depression Assistance and Education If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Depression Assistance and Education Audio that helps you understand clinical depression better. Focuses on changing some of the negative self-talk that occurs from not understanding what clinical depression is. For instance, helps you to understand it as an illness not a weakness so as to reduce the self-blame type of thinking that frequently occurs with clinical depression. By changing this thinking, you will be able to cope with your depression better. TRANSCRIPT Listen Depression Assistance and Education This audio is to help coach you to think differently about depression so that you can gain greater control over your depression. It is meant to be listened to repeatedly until you automatically think in this new way about depression. First, it is easier to learn when you are relaxed and focused. So take a few moments to concentrate on your breathing and relaxing your muscles. Especially focus on letting the muscles in your neck and shoulders relax each time you exhale. Just let the tension go and the shoulders droop as you inhale and exhale slowly. Allow yourself to focus on each breath you take. Notice the air coming into your body as you inhale. Notice your chest muscles as your lungs expand with each breath and notice the relaxation in your muscles as you exhale slowly. Just allow yourself to focus completely on your breath. As you do so you can begin to let other thoughts go and focus on what I am saying to you. This mindful breathing process that we just did is a very important part of learning to manage depression and I will explain why in just a bit. Right now though, the most important thing to understand about depression is that it is a physical condition. Depression is not an inability to cope with life problems. It is a genetic condition that you were born with just as someone with diabetes is born with that genetic condition. This is very important to understand because so many people with depression blame themselves for feeling bad. Unfortunately, the more you blame yourself and criticize yourself, the worse the depression can be. So, it is important to understand that you are not to blame for this physical condition. However, just as a person with diabetes may need to do certain things to manage the diabetes, there are things you can do to manage the depression. And we will discuss those things. Right now, though, I want you to understand a little more how depression works and why people have believed that it is a psychological problem when it is actually a physical illness. To understand this, it is necessary to understand how psychological problems and stress affect depression. When I say that depression is a physical illness, I am referring to the cause and the symptoms. The basic core symptoms of depression are all physical which include sleep problems, fatigue, lethargy, focus and concentration problems. The secondary symptoms are a result of these. So, because someone doesn't feel well, they may lack interest or desire in things, it may be hard to motivate, they may overeat as a way to feel better or get energy, they might not eat due to lack of desire, they might find it difficult to do most things, they may feel sad, worthless and discouraged. But the core symptoms are physical! The reason there is so much confusion about depression and the tendency to believe that it is psychological is because psychological stress worsens depression. Think of it this way. Imagine a person who had no psychological stress but had depression and rated their symptoms as a 5 on a 10 point scale meaning that the symptoms were uncomfortable but manageable. Now that person has a disagreement with a friend. If they didn't have depression that disagreement might be rated a 1 on the same scale but since they have depression, their rating may now be a 6. Now imagine they just discovered some unpaid bills and are having a budget problem. Under normal conditions that might rate a 2 on the scale but with the depression and the disagreement with the friend this person may now be at an 8 on that 10 point scale which would indicate now that the symptoms are intolerable and unmanageable. My point is that these psychological factors add to the depressive symptoms but are not the cause. Without the depression, the psychological stress may have been very manageable. However, the combination creates an intolerable situation. As you can see, it is not that you can't manage the normal stressors of life, it is that you have to deal with the normal stressors of life in addition to the symptoms of the depression! Understanding this process, though, gives you a way to manage depression. You may not have control over the core depressive symptoms but you may have some degree of control over other stress in your life. The idea is that the more you control the other stress, the more you are able to tolerate the depression because you don't have to deal with the combined effect. The same concepts I'm sharing with you work for other physical illnesses such as heart disease. If the psychological impact can be reduced, many physical illnesses are better controlled. So, I want to share with you some methods to help you begin to manage the depression. Let's return back to your breathing for a moment. I'd like you to again focus on your breath. Allow yourself to relax your neck and shoulders and completely focus on your breath as you slowly inhale and exhale. Notice the air as it comes into your body. Notice the change in your chest muscles and your shoulders as you inhale. Notice the air as it leaves your body. Pay particular attention to the relaxation of your muscles as you exhale. Let your shoulders drop and notice those muscles relax. Let your facial muscles relax. Imagine the muscles in your forehead becoming very smooth and relaxed. Let that relaxation continue down into your cheeks and your jawjust let all those muscles relax as you continue to focus on each breath you take. Now as you continue to breathe slowly, we will discuss this mindfulness method that you are using now. Simply speaking, mindfulness is focusing on your immediate experience. Right now that experience is your breathing and listening to what I am saying. Most often, people are not in a mindful state. When you are caught up in thoughts about worries or negative thoughts or demand thoughts, you are not being mindful. Because usually those things are not your immediate experience. For instance, if you have a demand thought of I should be doing something, that demand is not your immediate experience. You can either be doing something or not doing something which can both be mindful states but being critical of yourself is not a mindful stateit is a stressor. And as I said earlier, you want to reduce stress so as to make your depression more manageable. Mindfulness is not a stressful state. Even when we are being mindful about a crisis, we are usually less stressed. I have had many anxious clients who have told me When I have to deal with a real crisis, I am calm. Maybe you have had that experience. The reason a person, even an anxious person, can be calm in a crisis is because they are focused on the immediate moment of resolving the problem! Which is being mindful. However, if instead of focusing on resolving the problem, they were catastrophizing or thinking I can't handle this then they are more likely to feel the stress of the situation. Mindfulness is not a state you can be in constantly, but it is one you can learn to access more frequently. Throughout the day just try to bring your attention to your immediate experience. Notice what you see around you. Notice what you hear, smell, taste. For instance, if you are eating something, don't just mindlessly put it in your mouth. Instead, notice the texture, the smell, the flavor. Notice your muscles as you chew and swallow. Notice the experience of each bite you take. Or, if you are washing dishes, instead of thinking about other things, notice the sound and feel of the water, notice your muscles as you wipe the dishes. Pay attention to the experience. You can practice mindfulness with anything you do. If you are in a conversation with someone, focus on that person instead of what you are going to say or what that person may think of you. Try to understand the other person and your experience of that person as fully as possible. The more that you practice mindfulness, the more you are able to get outside of the thoughts in your head. The more you do that, the more you reduce one aspect of your stress which helps you to manage your depression more. (Learn more about mindfulness by listening to mindfulness training audios.) I also want to mention relaxation here. When you do deep relaxation such as listening to guided imagery, you actually change the chemicals in your system. Many people are familiar with how exercise releases endorphins which is a chemical that reduces pain and makes us feel good. However, most people don't realize that relaxation increases a chemical called Norepinephrine in your system. And this is a chemical that is low for most people with depression. So deep relaxation is a natural method of changing the chemical process in your system! Another stressor over which we have some control is how we think about things that happen. Certainly, it is normal when people are feeling bad (whether it is due to the flu, chronic pain, or depression) to think more negatively. That is due to the way memories are stored in our brainsexperiences with similar emotions tend to be stored together. And because they are associated, it is easier to recall events or thoughts related to your current state of mind. For example, you may have had the experience of being angry with someone you love but at the time of your anger you seem to only be able to think of every thing that person has done to make you angry and it is hard to think of the positive memories. That is the natural way our brains function. However, we can overcome that natural way by deliberately choosing to think differently. As we make this choice repeatedly, the new thoughts become associated with our emotional states. For example, if I'm dealing with a difficult situation and I keep telling myself I can handle this rather than I can't handle this eventually the new thought is present when I have to deal with difficult situations. It is a matter of repetition to create the association. At first that repetition has to be deliberate because it has to overcome the natural negativity, but eventually it can become the more natural way to think. A good way to deliberately change this thinking is to use the cognitive diary method in which you write down your negative thoughts, examine why they are irrational, and write new thoughts to challenge the old ones. For example, many people with depression have thoughts such as I'll never feel better. The irrational distortion in this thought is generalization which is the idea that because something is true now you assume that it will always be true. The way to challenge this is by telling yourself I may feel bad now, but there are some things I can do to help myself feel better so I don't always have to feel this way. By challenging the irrational thinking frequently, you will begin to change your thinking which will help reduce the stress caused by the thinking. Another stressor that can add to the depression, is the tendency for depressed people to suppress emotions. I think this is for a couple of reasons. One is due to what I mentioned earlierthe self-blame. Depressed people often feel they are at fault for allowing their negative emotions to get out of control. Therefore, they feel that those emotions are not okay. The other reason to suppress emotions is that you already feel bad enough and so you don't want to feel the negative emotions. The suppression of emotions is a problem for a couple of reasons. One is that it is almost impossible to suppress negative emotions without suppressing positive emotions. Therefore, people with depression are often emotionally numb. The second problem with suppressing emotions is that our emotions have a purposethey provide us with information and help us to cope. So, if you are suppressing emotions, instead of coping with the problems related to those emotions, you are adding stress to what you already deal with. Let me give you an example. The emotion of grief has a very natural course of healing if we allow it to occur. And when I'm talking about grief, I mean any type of loss, not just due to death of a loved one. For instance, anyone who is listening to this is dealing with the grief of having depression. You have lost so much because of the depression. You may have lost your energy or vitality. You may have lost relationships. You may have lost interest in things you enjoy. You may have lost dreams and hopes. But you have lost something. Now, most likely, just me mentioning these things has made you aware of your grief. The tendency for most people is that they don't want to feel sadness of the grief. So they may get stuck in the denial stage of grief which may be something like I don't have anything to feel bad about. Other people have it worse. Or they may get stuck in the anger. In fact, some of you may be angry with me right now and are thinking Why is she making me feel worse? This is supposed to help me! Well, allowing the natural process of grief does help but it may feel worse before it feels better. The numbness of the depression is dangerous because it is ever-lasting. But grief doesn't last when we allow it to be expressed. Grief actually has a very predictable course when you allow yourself to fully experience the emotions. The grief process is a healing process. You have every right to be angry and sad about what depression has cost you! Other people without depression don't understand. They don't understand the loss you have experienced due to the depression. This certainly isn't something you would do to yourself. It is not your fault. You didn't ask for it. But you do have to deal with it. And you are dealing with it. You are doing something right now by listening to me and learning about your depression. So instead of suppressing your emotions allow them to be expressed. However, there are ways that are helpful and ways that are not. For instance, allowing your anger to come out as irritability with people close to you is not helpful. One way I have found that has worked for many of my clients is to write a grief letter. In the case of depression, the grief letter may not be to a person but may be to the depression itself. You might start with something like Dear Depression, I'm so mad at you because of what you have done to me. And then just express whatever you feel. This helps to release the emotions. However, it is very intense so it is important to have a plan to take care of yourself afterwards. Also, you may need to do this with the guidance of a therapist. The important thing right now, however, is to validate your emotions to allow you to feel them. It may not feel like it immediately, but as you release your emotions, it will help reduce your stress. Finally, I want to mention another group of stressors involving problem-solving and goal-setting. If we have an unsolved problem, it just adds to our level of stress. Therefore, it is important for you to try to do something about any problem that has a solution or partial solution. However, if you are like most people with depression, you are feeling so bad that trying to do anything just seems over-whelming. I have found with my clients, though, that if we can set small goals that are manageable, eventually they add up. The key is to develop a goal that is simple enough that it is hard not to do it. For example, if your room is a mess instead of saying I need to get this room clean which may be too over-whelming and then doesn't get done, say Whenever I get up, I'm just going to put one thing away. You would be surprised at how much gets accomplished with simple goals. Activity of any sort is helpful for depression. I think this is true because activity is more mindful. You are focused on your immediate experience. So especially, doing things that you would normally enjoy is a good idea even if it seems like you wouldn't enjoy them. The more you do those things depression becomes less of a central focus of your life. I hope that by listening to this you have some ideas about how you can address your depression. The more you listen to this, the more it will help change your thinking about the obstacles to dealing with your depression. Also, people often focus on different aspects of what I'm saying when they are ready to hear it. Keep in mind that you are taking steps to deal with your depression by listening to this. As you change your thinking and learn to be more mindful, you will reduce the additional stress that makes your depression worse. You will be able to focus more on how to care for yourself with the depression rather than being self-critical. As you care for yourself, it will help make your depression more manageable. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles MEASURE OF ATTACHMENT QUALITIES The following questionnaire is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. As with many research questionnaires, this questionnaire may not be normed for online participants. Please take this into account when you receive the results. This questionnaire assesses attachment tendencies and resulting anxiety and avoidance. Choose the response that best describes how you agree with each item. No login required to obtain results. Item 1: When I'm close to someone, it gives me a sense of comfort about life in general. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 2: I often worry that my partner doesn't really love me. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 3: I have trouble getting others to be as close as I want them to be. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 4: I find it easy to be close to others. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 5: I often worry my partner will not want to stay with me. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 6: Others want me to be more intimate than I feel comfortable being. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 7: It feels relaxing and good to be close to someone. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 8: I am very comfortable being close to others. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 9: I dont worry about others abandoning me. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 10: My desire to merge sometimes scares people away. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 11: I prefer not to be too close to others. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 12: I find others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 13: I get uncomfortable when someone wants to be very close. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. Item 14: Being close to someone gives me a source of strength for other activities. I disagree a lot. I disagree a little. I agree a little. I agree a lot. No login required to obtain results. For authors and more information: Carver, C. S. (1997). Adult attachment and personality: Converging evidence and a new measure. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 865-883. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 50 TOOLS FOR PANIC AND ANXIETY--Index by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "50 CBT tools for panic and anxiety are divided into several categories: general skills, initial relaxation training, initial cognitive restructuring, advanced mindfulness training, advanced cognitive restructuring, and exposure treatment." Section 1: Using these Tools and General Skills If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Section 2: Initial Relaxation Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Section 3: Initial Cognitive Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Section 4: Advanced Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Section 5: Advanced Cognitive Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Section 6: Exposure Methods If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Index to 50 Tools Listen to Audio Versions Section 1: Using these Tools and General Skills Listen Section 2: Initial Relaxation Training Listen Section 3: Initial Cognitive Training Listen Section 4: Advanced Mindfulness Listen Section 5: Advanced Cognitive Training Listen Section 6: Exposure Methods Listen Index Using These Tools and General Skills--page 1 General Skills (cont.)--page 2 Initial Relaxation Training--page 3 Initial Relaxation Training (cont.)--page 4 Initial Cognitive Training--page 5 Initial Cognitive Training (cont.)--page 6 Initial Cognitive Training (cont.)--page 7 Initial Cognitive Training (cont.)--page 8 Advanced Mindfulness--page 9 Advanced Mindfulness (cont.)--page 10 Advanced Cognitive Training--page 11 Advanced Cognitive Training (cont.)--page 12 Exposure Methods--page 13 Exposure Methods (cont.)--page 14 Exposure Methods--page 15 Exposure Methods (cont.)--page 16 Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles List of Irrational Beliefs by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. The following is a list of the irrational beliefs used in Excel At Life's cognitive diary examples and apps. Tweet Negative Evaluation of Self Viewing yourself and your abilities negatively. Article: Danger: Negativity Ahead Negative Evaluation of Others Viewing others, their motives, and abilities negatively. Article: Danger: Negativity Ahead Negative Evaluation of Situations Expecting negative outcomes and seeing only the negative aspects of a situation Article: Danger: Negativity Ahead Catastrophic Thinking Believing the worst possible scenario will occur. Article: Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Shoulds Having unreasonable expectations or demands. Article: To Should? Or, Not to Should? Mind-Reading Others Believing you know what others are thinking or feeling based on their actions. Article: Read Books, Not Minds Mind-Reading Expectation Believing others should know what you are thinking or what you want Article: Read Books, Not Minds Labeling Self Using negative labels to describe yourself. Article: Danger: Negativity Ahead Labeling Others Using negative labels to describe others. Article: Danger: Negativity Ahead Generalizing Believing that what happened in one situation is likely to happen in another. Article: But It Happened Before! Blaming Having expectations about others' behavior and criticizing others. Article: To Should? Or, Not to Should? Internal Control Believing you should be in control of all situations and that outcomes are based on your effort alone. Article: When the Need For Control Gets Out of Control External Control Believing everything that occurs is due to luck or fate so that you don't take responsibility. Article: When the Need For Control Gets Out of Control Personalizing Believing others' behavior and reactions are in response to you. Article: Why Are People Mean? Don\'t Take It Personally! Emotional Reasoning Believing an emotion is reality without evaluating the evidence. Article: Use Your Head! And Your Heart! Copyright 2020 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training: Setting Goals to Maximize Performance by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "By developing a set of specific goals and a plan for reaching those goals, athletes can more effectively use their practice time and even reduce the time required in practice to attain their goals." Tweet The following article is the first in a series of articles that will focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review. Training smart is more important than the amount of daily practice. Too often an athlete believes that the more he or she practices, the more proficient he/she will become. However, this plan is not only ineffective, but it can also be detrimental to achieving the desired outcome. An athlete who practices frequently and hard without an overall plan will be more likely to suffer the effects of overtraining such as burn-out, exhaustion, and increased injuries rather than actually improving performance. By developing a set of specific goals and a plan for reaching those goals, athletes can more effectively use their practice time and even reduce the time required in practice to attain their goals. Obviously, this does not mean that the martial artist can achieve rank or win tournaments with little practice; it means that the athlete does not need to waste time through ineffective practice and through the harmful effects of overtraining. Setting performance goals is beneficial for a number of reasons. In addition to improving the quality of practice, it reduces boredom and increases motivation. When the martial artist is able to observe progress towards a goal on a daily or weekly bais, he or she is more likely to remain interested in achieving that goal. If instead, he/she engages in routine practice towards a belt rank that is six months away, it is easier to become discouraged. In addition, goal setting helps the athlete know what is expected which allows for greater attention to a particular skill that needs to be developed. Thus, practice becomes more focused and efficient. Finally, setting realistic, achievable goals increases the athletes self-confidence which is crucial to the ultimate outcome of success. Self-confidence increases because his/her attitude regarding success becomes more positive as goals are accomplished. This issue of goal-setting is especially important when developing complex skills such as required by sparring. Sparring is one of the most complex of athletic endeavors because it requires the development of numerous skills that must be smoothly integrated with one another to achieve a successful performance. In addition, it is an individual sport so there is no reliance on other team members. The martial artist needs to be completely committed to the outcome and able to see him/herself as capable of achieving that outcome. If all the intermediate goals can be viewed as leading progressively towards the final outcome, the martial artist can believe not only the possibility, but of the probability of success. How to Set Goals 1) To set effective goals, the difference between performance-oriented goals and outcome-oriented goals must be understood. Performance-oriented goals which focus on achieving specific skills are more effective than outcome-oriented goals which focus on winning or achieving an outcome. Such goals are more effective because they are under the control of the athlete which improves problem-solving ability and increases persistence. In addition, the athlete becomes more likely to value learning over the risk of making mistakes. The outcome-oriented martial artist will try just hard enough to or achieve rank while trying to avoid the risk of error or loss. This prevents martial artists from truly challenging themselves to achieve their greatest potential. Outcome-oriented goals do have their place, however, in identifying what the martial artist ultimately wants to achieve such as obtaining the black belt or winning a tournament. However, the performance-oriented goals give him/her the steps to reach that goal. 2) The next step in goal setting is to assess the martial artists current skill level and to identify what specific skills need to be developed further to achieve the desired outcome. For instance, if the martial artists outcome-oriented goal is to win at a point-sparring tournament, he needs to determine what performance factors need to be improved. Through observing his performance of tape and getting feedback from others, he might determine that that he needs to throw faster, higher kicks. 3) Once the specific goal has been identified, the goal should then be stated in a positive, measurable way that is realistic, but challenging. For example: My goal is to increase the height of my kicks by six inches. 4) Target dates are then identified: My goal is to increase the height of my kicks by six inches in the next six months. To do so, I will need to increase the height of my kicks by one inch a month. 5) The martial artist should then determine what are the methods to achieve this goal. For the above example, she might decide to increase flexibility training and to practice higher kicks on a target bag which allows her to measure the height. 6) As the martial artist works toward his goal, he should record his progress and share it with others. The process of sharing the goal and progress with others increases his commitment and allows others to give him encouragement. 7) Finally, the martial artist should have a reward system in place when goals are achieved. This encourages follow through and the development of future goals. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles This site provides a number of resources from mindfulness-based cognitive-behavioral therapy (MCBT) methods to help you cope with life problems and to become the best person you can be. Sometimes this site can be overwhelming because there are so many resources. The following are some general guides to help you start. Then, select the categories that are most relevant to your situation. Resources Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Did You Know Psychotherapy has Stronger Scientific Evidence than Many Common Medical Procedures? Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? App: CBT Tools for Healthy Living Audios Panic Assistance Mindful Grounding All anxiety assistance audios Articles 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety How to Manage Panic and Anxiety 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Developing Tolerance of Anxiety All anxiety articles Learn to manage anxiety> Audios Depression Assistance and Education Managing Insomnia Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury Articles I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where Do I Start? Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment All depression articles Take steps to cope with depression> Don't Accept Criticism Without Evaluating the Source How can criticism overload be avoided? One of the best ways to avoid criticism overload is to evaluate it before accepting it. This can be difficult to do because you need to listen to the criticism to evaluate it which can cause distress and affect self-esteem. However, one way to decrease the amount of criticism you absorb is to first evaluate the source of the criticism before even listening to it. Read more... Related: The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Understanding Mindfulness Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Step 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Mindfulness Practice Exercises Create a more mindful life> Telehealth withDr. Monica Frank Services Evaluation and guidance using the Excel At Life resources Brief, intermittant model Mindfulness-based cognitive-behavioral therapy (MCBT) HIPAA compliant video or phone sessions About Dr. Frank Licensed psychologist Over 30 years experience Specializes with anxiety and stress Further info Managing Stress Audios Stress Education Quick stress relief Relaxation Articles Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help List of Stress Management Methods Learn to handle stress> Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log What triggers my stress? When am I not as depressed? Are my headaches associated with certain places or people? Is my treatment effective? The Mood Log feature of the app not only gives you a place to record your daily moods but it will provide an analysis of how different activities or events can impact your moods. Read more... Passive-Aggressive Behavior Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing With Passive-Aggressive People 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Methods to deal with passive-aggression> Self-esteem & Self-efficacy Audios Self-Esteem Blackboard All self-esteem improvement audios Articles 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy All self-concept articles Improve self-esteem> Motivation Audios Hot Air Balloon Motivation Sport Motivation All motivational audios Articles Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Motivation: Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Become more motivated> Questionnaires Cognitive Styles Test: Learn about your thinking styles to improve your life Your Happiness Assessment: Discover what interferes with your happiness General Self-efficacy: Your belief in your abilities Self-Esteeem: What is the attitude you have towards yourself? Perceived Control Scale: Assess the degree of control you believe you have Perfectionist or Efficient? Does perfectionism interfere with your life? CES-Depression: Do you have depression? Social Anxiety: Assess your degree of social anxiety List of PsychTests Audios When You Have Been Betrayed Loving Kindness Meditation Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Forgiveness and the Process of Healing Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Audios Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Lies You Were Taught as a Child Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Building Blocks Emotion Training Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? When Everyone is Traumatized What Happens to Those Who Are Truly Suffering? Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Audios Choosing Happiness Loving Kindness Meditation Compassion Meditation Mindfulness Articles The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions Happiness is An Attitude Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Questionnaire Your Happiness Assessment Bring happiness into your life> Audios Jealousy Assistance 5 Methods to Managing Anger Mindfulness Training Articles When Is Jealousy Irrational? What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Jealousy: When the Damage is Done What to Do When Your Partner's Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Relationship Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy, and Impact on Relationships How to start handling your jealousy> Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing With Passive-Aggressive People If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Crazy-Makers: Dealing With Passive-Aggressive People by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen EXAMPLES Denial Blaming Revenge-Seeking Controlling Guilting Sarcastic Back-Stabbing Index of Passive-Aggressive Examples Tweet I'm sure you've dealt with individuals who have caused you to be so frustrated that afterwards you scratch your head asking "Am I crazy?" Most likely you just had an encounter with a passive-aggressive person. Such encounters may include sarcasm, shifting blame, saying one thing while meaning another to name a few. For instance, I used to know a co-worker who was very skilled at giving back-handed compliments such as "You look great! You must be doing something different" as well as sarcasm disguised as a compliment "Oh, I hear you've managed to pull off another miracle." The problem with these kinds of comments is that if you try to confront them about the insult, you will be accused of not understanding, "I didn't mean it that way" or of misinterpreting, "You must have a problem to think that. I was just trying to compliment you. Sorry I didn't word it right to suit you." As a result, you end up looking like the bad guy, feeling frustrated, and asking yourself, "Am I crazy?" And the other person walks away blameless. Reader's Example: Co-Worker's "Joking" Criticism Question: My coworker has on five occasions commented on me never being at the office. I work at home one or two days a week as do others. However, he seems to want to point out that I'm never at the office. It always seems to be a joke. For example: I would compliment him on his attire and he would say "I always dress like this. You would know if you were here." Not sure what to say back to him....help?!! Response WHAT IS PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR? Passive-aggressive communication seeks to control the emotions of others and thereby, control their behavior. Typically, this communication style seeks to express anger in an indirect manner. By doing so the individual is able to deny all responsibility for the anger yet they score a direct hit on their target. A common example is criticizing as if you are concerned, "You've put on so much weight! You might get diabetes or heart disease if you don't take it easy with the sweets." Certainly, in the right context this could actually be an expression of concern. However, the right context doesn't include making such a statement in front of others just as the individual is taking a bite of dessert. In this instance, if the comment is confronted, the person will often deny responsibility by stating something like, "I'm just concerned about you. Wow, are you sensitive!" The best way to recognize passive-aggressive behavior is by analyzing the process and purpose of the behavior. Typically, as the purpose is to control and/or deflect responsibility for anger, the passive-aggressive behavior causes frustration or anger in the recipient and will escalate conflict unless the recipient handles it passively by swallowing, ignoring, or discounting their anger. Yet, if the purpose is to escalate conflict, the passive-aggressive behavior is calculated to cause the recipient to act unreasonably. Reader's Example: Mother's "Helpful" Criticism Question: Mother upon seeing outfit daughter was wearing to work: You know why Hillary Clinton wears pants? Because she has those cankles, right? She is smart. (pause) You shouldn't wear your skirts that short either. You can't help it if you are built like your grandmother but you should wear your skirts longer to cover more of your legs. I am only trying to HELP you since you look very nice but you would look better if you wore your dresses longer... Response 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People The most difficult social conflict usually involves passive-aggressive (PA) behavior. The reason it is more distressing than even aggressive behavior is because it causes the recipient to be doubtful of him or her self. When someone is aggressive towards you, their intention is clear and it is easier to make a decision such as I need to steer clear of this person or I need to report this behavior. However, the purpose of passive-aggressive behavior is for the aggressor to avoid responsibility for their actions. PA behavior can easily be denied or blame shifted: I didn't mean it the way you took it or You're being too sensitive or You're just trying to get me in trouble. As a result, PA behavior cannot be addressed in the same way you might handle aggressive behavior. When managing PA people you need to be aware of the underlying purpose of the behavior so that you can respond in a way that prevents them from succeeding at their agenda. The less likely they are to achieve their goal, the more likely you will see a reduction in their behavior. Read more... For example, a father conveys the subtle message of "I don't think you're capable" by taking on a task to do it right, "Here, let me help you cut that out" as he takes over the child's school project. When the child states "I can do it myself" the father keeps working on the project "I know you can. I'm just helping. Now doesn't that look better?" If the child should protest angrily, "You don't think I can do it right!" the father might respond "Of course I do. I was just helping. You are so ungrateful!" In this situation, the father has escalated the situation to cause the child to become angry and then to criticize the child for being angry. This teaches the child that her emotions are unacceptable as well as that her father doesn't believe she is capable. Over time the child learns to not trust her own perceptions of reality. Another common example may be when a couple are trying to make a simple decision such as where to go for dinner. The wife says, "I don't care" but then pouts when her husband decides. When her husband asks her what is wrong she responds "You know I don't like Chinese." Later on in a completely unrelated situation, she may even take this a step further "You make all the decisions and don't take my preferences into account!" This can become even more ugly if the wife should accuse the husband of deliberately mistreating her "You do whatever you want. You don't care about my feelings!" This example shows how a simple situation can escalate to include many different situations. The passive-aggressive wife can angrily attack her husband while blaming him for the attack. He becomes confused and angry "You're crazy!" which allows his wife to prove her point "See how you treat me? Calling me names and putting me down!" Reader's Example: Grandmother's Criticism of Child Question: My mother criticizes my 10-year-old son about his hair, clothes, the activities he likes, you name it. He's a good kid, does well in school, and I think that he should be able to make his own choices about these things. I can see that my son is hurt by this criticism. When I try to tell my mother to stop, she and my sister say, "He's a boy and he needs to toughen up. He needs to be able to handle teasing. You're just over-protecting him." Is she right? How do I get her to stop? Response CATAGORIES OF PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE PEOPLE. Although passive-aggressive behavior is generally hurtful to the recipient, the intention is not always for the purpose of hurting the other person. Therefore, whether the intention to hurt is present can categorize the type of passive-aggressive person. Malicious type. Some passive-aggressive people deliberately attempt to cause the other person to become angry so as to displace their own feelings of anger onto the recipient. In this situation, if a man has a bad day at work he can create an argument at home in a passive-aggressive manner and then take his anger out on his wife. For instance, he comes home, glances around and asks "What have you been doing today?" When his wife becomes defensive "Are you saying that I'm lazy?" he responds with "You are really over-reacting! I was only curious about what you did today. You are so sensitive and I can't even talk to you!" This type of person could be labeled an aggressive passive-aggressive in that the purpose is to create anger or to try to control someone else. "You should really try to treat your mother better after all the sacrifices I've made for you. You're so selfish" is an example of trying to control behavior. By negatively labeling a behavior, they hope to control the person's responses. The malicious type is reinforced whenever they can successfully control the other person or when they can escalate conflict while remaining seemingly innocent. Unintentionally hurtful type. Another type of passive-aggressive person we could label as the passive passive-aggressive. Typically, they are trying not to hurt the other person but in the process may unintentionally cause frustration or irritation. This person also is trying to control the other person such as trying to control the other person's emotions. They don't want the other person to feel bad so they will try to refrain from any communication that may seem negative. However, their feelings may be readable at a nonverbal level. Unfortunately, the other person may not read the feelings accurately. All passive-aggressive behavior is malicious with the intention to cause emotional pain or distress. True False. Sometimes people may not know how to properly communicate anger or unmet needs so they use an indirect approach. False Correct! Not all passive-aggressive behavior is intended to hurt someone. For instance, a girlfriend is hoping that her boyfriend will pick up on her hints about wanting to get engaged but doesn't express her wishes; she becomes irritated with him and when he picks up on the nonverbal frustration and asks if anything is wrong, she says, "No." However, he becomes less certain about their relationship due to this passive-aggressive interaction. Another example is a man who is disappointed that his wife passed up a job opportunity but doesn't want to tell her how he feels because he doesn't want to hurt her feelings. However, his disappointment leads to him unknowingly being less affectionate causing his wife to believe that he is less attracted to her. TYPES OF PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR. As you see from some of the previous examples, passive-aggressive behavior is manifested in many ways. Although the bottom line in identifying the behavior is that it succeeds in indirectly expressing anger; the passive-aggressive individual does not have to take responsibility for the controlling behavior and angry message. However, we can divide the behaviors into several common categories as described below. Obviously, you will see that these behaviors often overlap so more than one may occur in a situation. Denial. This type of passive-aggressive behavior occurs when the individual appears to be distressed, frustrated, bored, confused, or any number of emotions but when questioned refuses to admit to the feeling. They may outright deny or they may avoid by ignoring, working, or deflecting with humor. However, the behavior has the outcome of frustrating the recipient because they are unable to confront and resolve the problem. Thus, this individual is able to control the other by not engaging in conflict resolution when an obvious problem has occurred. What type of passive-aggressive behavior is it if someone provides "helpful" but unwanted advice and responds in a hurt voice when the advice is rejected: "I was only trying to help." Blaming Incorrect. Revenge-seeking Incorrect. Controlling Right! This person is trying to control by providing unwanted advice and then also uses guilting when confronted. Sarcastic Incorrect. Blaming. The skilled passive-aggressive blamer can rephrase almost any comment to make it appear the recipient's fault. "You should have known!" or "You're too sensitive!" are common methods of blaming the victim. Sometimes it can be so extreme as to border on the ridiculous if it wasn't so hurtful; for example, "You know I'm a grouch before dinner. I wouldn't have yelled at you if you wouldn't have asked me a question." This person deflects all attempts to communicate about problems by blaming the other person. Reader's Example: Living with Blaming and Guilting Mother (Part 1) Question: My partner's mum is staying with us and she's quite PA and I'd love to know better ways of dealing with some of what she does... A) She blamed my partner for not telling me her plans had changed (in the last thirty minutes) and that she did want me to include her for dinner after all. But she didn't tell him she now wanted to eat but only that she was leaving later. She didn't tell me (the person cooking) anything. We offered to split what we had but she made a fuss whilst making a sandwich and saying "I suppose you don't want to share!" Sporadically through the next hour she'd sigh and say to herself "it wouldn't have taken you both MUCH effort to pad out the meal" and "you've got to start passing messages." B) Partner's mum is upset dishwasher wasn't run overnight. She complains to my partner loudly enough that I can hear: "I know she doesn't CARE about keeping the house tidy but how could anyone NOT run the dishwasher? Why on earth WOULDN'T you?" Partner: "That's a little unfair when you make these general statements. I know she cares and she must have had a reason." Mum: "Why on earth wouldn't you! It's just common sense!" (In fact I hadn't run it because she'd often complained about running it when it wasn't totally full and had even unpacked the top row to demonstrate that you could jam one more glass inside. This time the dishwasher had five or six spaces.) Partner: "I would like you to think about maybe not making general statements. It upsets people." Mum: "I'm not allowed to think anything! I've just got to shut up and keep my thoughts to myself. You want me gone. You make it totally clear you HATE having me here!" Partner: "We like you here. I just want you to know people feel hurt if..." Mum: "I'm not ALLOWED to say anything!!" Slams door, sulks in room. We leave her to it. Returns two hours later to scream at partner that he's a hateful (expletive)! Slams sitting room door. More sulking. Response Revenge-Seeking. This behavior is calculated to try to hurt the other person without taking responsibility. An example of this is described above with the "back-handed compliment." The individual somehow is threatened by the other, whether real or imagined, and seeks revenge in an underhanded manner. By doing so, they can claim ignorance if confronted such as "I had no idea you would take it that way" or resort to blaming "You must be imagining that. I would never do anything to hurt you." Controlling. This behavior seeks to control the individual in an indirect manner. For instance, a man who emotionally abuses his partner says "No one could ever love you the way I do" with the intended result being insecurity in the woman so that she won't leave him. Another example is parents telling their adult children that they should respect or love them because they are their parents thus trying to control their behavior. Love and respect is something that occurs due to the underlying relationship not because of a demand. Reader's Example: Controlling by Refusing to Discuss Problems Question: Any time I want to calmly discuss a situation that is bothering me in our relationship, my husband's reply is always "I don't want to fight about this!" Although I tell him that I'm not trying to fight, I just want to talk about it, he never has the discussion with me and the problems are always left unresolved. Response Guilting. This behavior controls through using guilt either directly or indirectly to control the other. An indirect form of guilt may be "Don't worry about me...I'll be okay" followed by a sigh. A more direct form may be describing all the efforts made on your behalf followed by an expectation "I've only cleaned the house today, taken the kids to their activities, checked on your mom. Taking me out to dinner isn't too much to ask, is it?" Sarcastic. Many of the examples above contain sarcasm probably because it tends to be a favorite of mine. Sarcastic passive-aggressive comments are the ultimate indirect form of aggression because they are calculated to avoid responsibility such as "You know I was just kidding." Yet, they have the impact of controlling the other person's emotions and potentially their thinking and behavior. Back-stabbing. This behavior often uses techniques such as hitting below the belt by using previously confided or sensitive information against the person or by communicating through someone else but with plausible deniability. This individual may even resort to showing artificial concern as a way of validating their behavior "You know I wouldn't want to hurt you but I'm only saying this because I'm concerned about you." Reader's Example: Back-stabbing Doctor Question: A doctor I work with feels I am "too proud" and independent in my work. He dislikes my personality, and that's ok--we don't have to be buddies. But he has taken to telling each new group of residents that there is no point discussing anything with me because I am overbearing. He tells them they should just avoid discussion and agree with me. When I present an assessment in rounds he covers his eyes and bows his head. After he leaves, if I need to speak to one of the residents about a patient having problems, I can see them bracing themselves as I approach or rolling their eyes even though we may have never yet spoken to each other! I am viewed as a competant and compassionate doctor by families and co-workers, but this treatment is distracting and disheartening. It is making it difficult to provide safe care, to the point that I have considered leaving my practice. Response As you can see with the examples in this article, many times the actual words that the passive-aggressive person uses may seem reasonable or even caring. Therefore, to determine passive-aggressive behavior, the context, the relationship, previous experiences with the individual, and the non-verbal communication needs to be considered. However, without even considering all of these factors, you usually know that you are the recipient of passive-aggressive behavior by your own emotional reaction. If you feel frustrated, deflated, or crazy as a result of an interaction, it probably was passive-aggressive. HOW DO YOU HANDLE PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE PEOPLE? This needs to be the subject of a separate article. In fact, what I would like to do is to use some real-life examples that people submit and discuss them in detail in another article. So, if you have an example, please submit it on the form below by describing the situation in detail, your relationship with the person, and the specifics of what was said and how it was said. Although each situation may vary, there are some basic steps you can take with passive-aggressive behavior. 1) Identify the reward. Determine what the passive-aggressive person achieves by engaging in the behavior. Do they get something they want? Do they make you feel bad? Do they discharge their anger on to you so they can feel better? Do they escalate conflict so they can make you look bad? Reader's Example: Why Does My Husband Want a "Reward" for Hurting Me? Question: Best article on passive/aggressive. Wish I read this 27 years ago. Didn't know what I have been dealing with. Why does my husband want a "reward" of seeing me hurt, upset, put down? Is this sick behavior learned from watching his parents? Will he ever "want" to treat me nice? Or is he incapable? I just want a husband who loves me and acts like it. I have been telling him for years his behavior is emotionally abusive, but he cant seem to stop. Why? Why is his reward to see me unhappy? Response 2) Refuse to provide the reward. If you refuse to provide the reward, they are no longer in control of the interaction which tends to cause the situation to backfire on them. For instance, when the co-worker I described earlier would give me a back-handed compliment I would effusively respond "Oh, that's so nice of you to say that! I really appreciate it!" as if it were a true compliment. This would have the effect of making her believe that she had not accomplished her purpose (which she hadn't anyway because I was thinking "How silly of a grown adult to act this way") which tended to reduce the behavior because she was getting her reward of feeling better at my expense. If you determine that the individual is trying to escalate conflict, then you want to become even more calm almost to an extreme. The more calm you become, the more apparent and ridiculous their behavior will appear. Plus, you are not allowing them to get the reward of freely discharging their anger on to you. What I mean is that if you allow the situation to escalate, they will then engage in a full battle while blaming you for "starting" the argument. 3) Indirectly confront. Obviously, as I described above, if you directly confront the passive-aggressive person is likely to turn it against you. But if you confront with "I" statements instead of "you" statements and remain very calm you may be able to reduce the behavior. Although you are unlikely to get them to admit they were wrong, since they do not like to take responsibility, they are more likely to reduce the behavior if they know they will be confronted every time. What is usually the worst response when dealing with a passive-aggressive person? Ignoring the behavior Incorrect. Ignoring the passive-aggressive behavior can prevent them from achieving their goal of upsetting you which causes frustration for the passive-aggressive person. Getting angry. Right! Often the goal of passive-aggressive behavior is to escalate conflict in such a way that you look like the aggressor. When you get angry they have achieved their goal. Calmly responding. Incorrect. When you remain calm the passive-aggressive person isn't achieving their goal of upsetting you. Indirectly confronting. Incorrect. Confronting by letting them know how you feel or by setting a limit can be effective when dealing with passive-aggressive people. The following example uses the broken-record technique in which you repeatedly make your point of letting them know how you feel when they act in a passive-aggressive manner. "You need to be careful what you're eating. You're getting fat." "I feel hurt when you call me fat." "I'm just saying that because I'm concerned about you." "But I feel hurt when you call me that." "You're just too sensitive!" "That may be, but I'm letting you know that I feel hurt when you call me names." This statement uses the technique of agreeing with them but still using the broken record to make your point. "You need to just get over it." "Since I've told you that I feel hurt when you call me names should I assume that you are trying to hurt me when you call me names?" This last line should not be uttered unless the passive-aggressive person persists. ESCALATION OF BEHAVIOR WHEN SETTING LIMITS When you start changing a behavior pattern in which you've engaged with someone for a period of time, sometimes you may see the behavior get worse. Although sometimes this is because you are still learning and needing more practice, many times it occurs because the person will try to escalate the behavior in order to obtain their reward. It is much different from trying to change a child's temper tantrums. If you have been rewarding the child by trying to quiet her with a piece of candy whenever she has a temper tantrum and then you decided to stop doing that, you will initially see an increase in the temper tantrums. However, if you remain firm and consistent, eventually they will decrease. It will take time to learn to handle passive-aggressive people, however, it will be well worth the effort. When I'm working with clients frequently it will take a number of tries and adjustments in our approach but if we examine the behavior and the reward process we can usually find a method that can work. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Sadness is a State of Happiness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Sadness is a State of Happiness by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "Sadness is a state of happiness because it is an emotion and emotions allow us to solve problems and solving problems allows us to live as fully as we are capable." Tweet One day when I was sevenyearsold my father allowed me to choose our Sunday family activity. He said we could either take a drive across the Mississippi River or ride on the last streetcar in St. Louis. At that time of my life I had never seen an ocean or even a great lake and I was awed by the vastness of the Mississippi River. It never occurred to me that the river would always be there and the streetcars might not. I chose the river. Of course, driving across the river took all of fifteen seconds. Immediately after we crossed the bridge I regretted my decision. My regret at the time was that the streetcar excursion would have been lengthier. My regret later was that I never again had the opportunity to ride a streetcar in St. Louis. My father could have protected me from my regret and sadness. He could have taken me on a streetcar anyway or have convinced me that I had made the wrong decision. However, he allowed the decision to stand and allowed me to deal with the consequential emotions. I don't know what he intended, but I do believe that he was trying to be a good father that day. I learned a great deal from that decision. I didn't learn it all at once but over time I came to realize the value of this single incident. I learned that I could tolerate the outcome of a decision even if I didn't prefer such an outcome. I learned that I didn't have to be protected from emotions. And I learned that things aren't all good or all bad. In particular, I realized that my father with his many limitations could teach me a valuable lesson and that I could love that part of him even though I couldn't accept the rest. Why is protection from emotions harmful? Many people may disagree with my father's actions. They may feel that he should have protected my feelings. However, I think this was one of the most unselfish and loving moments of his life. As parents we frequently overprotect our children from feeling unpleasant emotions because we don't want to feel bad or uncomfortable ourselves. It is unpleasant for us to see our children unhappy. As a result we may protect them even when we know the more important lesson for them may be to experience the situation and the consequences. For example, a parent may excessively warn his child, "If you touch the stove you will get burned." If the child hasn't learned this lesson after a few warnings, she's probably not going to learn it with a hundred. However, if she touches the stove and gets burned she will probably learn the lesson. Now, certainly I don't mean this to apply to all situations. Obviously, a parent doesn't allow a child to play in the street to learn the lesson that a car may hit him. A parent has to use judgment as to what lessons a child is ready to learn. However, parenting involves teaching those lessons even though it may be painful for the parent. As a society, we are terrified of feeling any kind of bad feelings. We don't want to feel sad or hurt or angry. We come into this world as babies wanting all of our needs met. When we feel uncomfortable we cry until someone makes us feel better. This is normal development. However, sometimes we cry because we are bored or we demand to be taken care of when we can do it our-selves. Over time, if all of our demands are met, especially the unreasonable ones, we learn that discomfort is intolerable and we have to rid ourselves of it. We come to believe that we should never feel bored or sad or deprived. What is happiness? We have developed a distorted concept of happiness. Our culture as a whole focuses upon striving for happiness. We frequently believe that if we are not feeling ecstatic joy that something is wrong with us. We are a culture of sitcoms where problems are solved in a half hour and families are always functional or, at least, happily dysfunctional. The pursuit of happiness, of the American Dream, consumes our culture. Somehow we have come to believe that happiness is not only an inalienable right but also an achievement in and of itself. We believe that if we experience anything less than happiness we have failed. We never have enough money. We accumulate things that we don't even use. We want our children to achieve even more on this impossible feel good standard that we have set for ourselves. But we have it wrong. Happiness is not something we achieve but something that we experience when we have a sense of contentment and satisfaction with our lives and ourselves. This sense of satisfaction is not something that occurs only when things are going well but also when everything is falling apart around us. We cannot acquire happiness as we acquire things. Happiness is not something that is given to us because we are good. Happiness is an overall state of being that can occur even when we are sad, grieving, angry, hurt, stressed, or frustrated. In fact, the premise that I am making is that happiness occurs because we are capable of experiencing sadness, grief, anger, hurt, stress, and frustration. Why are all emotions valuable? I have found that many of my clients are fearful of emotional states. Frequently, they tell me, I don't want to feel sad or I shouldn't feel angry or frustrated or I should have more patience. When they feel sadness or grief they interpret this as meaning they have a clinical depression. But depression is a mental illness that is substantially different from the feeling of sadness. In fact, depression is more frequently a numbness or absence of emotion. Individuals who fear these emotional states are making an assumption that feeling bad or sad means something is wrong with them. However, the opposite is true. Experiencing a wide range of emotions suggests there is something right with us. We are created as beings capable of numerous feelings with many nuances. We don't have extraneous physical parts. Every-thing with which we are born has a purpose (or at least had a purpose at one time). Why would we be created with the capacity for emotions if we were not supposed to feel? Isnt it logical to consider that our feelings have a purpose? This very natural process sometimes becomes distorted for us for various reasons. For example, a few years ago I overheard a friend's mother tell her grandchild "No, you're not angry" when the child was trying to express how mad she was. Suddenly, it occurred to me why my friend had trouble with anger. She had been told most of her life that she wasn't feeling something that she was experiencing. "No, you're not angry." How easy it is to teach someone that feelings aren't acceptable. How do we find happiness? We are always seeking the answer as to how to achieve happiness. Frequently, we seem to seek enlightenment that we often equate with a constant state of nirvana. I find it curious that the one thing that is available to all of us, that is within us, seems to be beyond our grasp. The problem is that we continue to look out-ward for the answers. We expect the path to be mystical and expect that only a great teacher can show us the way. When, in reality, each of us has the way within us. And what is that way? It is to trust in our natural responses, to trust our instincts, to trust our emotions. Rather than avoiding our emotions and viewing them as something that gets in the way of our happiness, we can recognize our emotions as the path to happiness. The more we can fully experience emotions, the more we can use our emotions to help us cope with life. For instance, I can't tell you how many marriages I see destroyed because one or both individuals don't share their feelings. As a result, they make erroneous assumptions about what the other is thinking or feeling. If we experience anger because someone hurt us and we express our anger assertively, it may allow us to solve the problem. Whereas, if we keep it to ourselves, we only become more frustrated. Sadness is a state of happiness because it is an emotion and emotions allow us to solve problems and solving problems allows us to live as fully as we are capable. Our intellect only gives us a portion of the information we can obtain from the world. Imagine a poker game without the ability to observe the other players. We are always reading the nonverbal behavior of other people and this information helps us with making decisions. In a poker game, we use this information to determine if the other players are bluffing or how good they think their hand is. Frequently, this information is described as a "gut instinct." If we are asked why we made a certain choice during the poker game we may not be able to say, "Because the other player shifted her eyes when betting." However, our brain processed this information and we attribute the outcome to a "gut instinct." Have you ever noticed some people are much more in tune with these instincts and seem to read other people's intentions more accurately? And as a result, they seem to have a greater chance for success with the things they attempt? The reason this may be true is because such individuals are much more connected to their emotional states and can make interpretations and decisions based on their internal reactions to a situation. Many people don't have a clue as to what or sometimes when they are feeling because they don't tune in to the physical sensations of emotions. Other people are over-reactive and fearful to the physical sensations and therefore are often in the dark about their feelings and the information that is being provided. We need to learn to listen carefully to our bodies to be able to use our emotions in the way they were meant to be. How do "fixed desires" prevent happiness? We are prevented from doing this because we choose to look at the world unrealistically. One way we do this is by developing "fixed desires." A "fixed desire" is a belief regarding how life should be and that we cannot be happy unless life meets our expectations. Since life is rarely what we believe it should be, this type of thinking dooms us to unhappiness. For example, if I believe that I have to achieve a certain level of financial success in order to be happy, and then I become afflicted with a debilitating disorder that prevents me from working, I will be unhappy because reality doesn't match my fixed desire. However, if I believe that I can be happy no matter what obstacles life puts in my way and I view those obstacles as challenges or opportunities for growth, then I would still be happy. I saw this principle at work when I worked on a spinal cord injury unit during my internship. My job was to evaluate the psychological well-being of the patients on the unit. What impressed me was that even though everyone on the unit had a similar type of injury, some were miserable, negative, and dissatisfied whereas others were truly content with their lives and, as a result, living full lives. Also, the staff told me that those who were miserable tended to die at younger ages even though their physical injury didn't warrant it. I tend to attribute these differences to being stuck with a fixed desire focused on health and physical wholeness rather than being able to accept the experiences that life offers. What is the value of sadness? Experience is our teacher. To truly use the information provided by our emotions, we have to allow ourselves to experience the full range of emotions. All of our experience is relevant and important, even the unpleasant experiences, because we have the opportunity to learn and to grow. I know that for myself, some of the most unpleasant experiences in my life have been among the most important lessons. Naturally, at the time I didn't go into these experiences willingly, thinking how fortunate I was to be able to experience such pain. No, I resisted and told myself how unfair the situation was. It usually wasn't until later that I realized how valuable the experience was for me. And that the temporary sadness and pain have contributed significantly to my ability to be content with myself and to enjoy life. More recently, however, I am able to look at these experiences more broadly and at least tell myself, "I may not like this situation and I may prefer to not experience it; however, I am sure it will provide something important to my life. Maybe not now, and maybe not ten years from now, but someday it will be of value to me." This is your choice. You can avoid half of the experience that life offers you by avoiding the message of your emotions. Or you can truly "Seize the day" and fully experience your emotions and the benefit they bring to your life. Sadness is a state of happiness. And so are all the rest of our emotions part of our ability to be content and satisfied. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Satisfaction with Life Scale The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. Although this is a short and simple questionnaire it has been shown to be a reliable assessment of a person's satisfaction with life and an indicator for addressing areas of dissatisfaction. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: The Secret to Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions Happiness is an Attitude Happy Friends Can Improve Your Health Can a Gratitude List Make a Difference in Your Life? Managing Adversity Improves the Outcome of Happiness Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Why You Don't Need to Be Happy Buying Happiness: It Can Be Done! Not Happy? Just Wait... Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong The Danger of Seeking Happiness: How to Protect Your Children The Pursuit of Happiness or the Pursuit of Money? Can't Force Happiness on Someone Money May Not Buy Happiness, But How You Spend Money May Help Want to Live a Long and Happy Life? Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! Intelligence, Health and Happiness Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You More questionnaires: List of PsychTests Your Happiness Assessment Self-Esteem Self-Efficacy For authors and more information: Diener, E., Emmons, R. A., Larsen, R. J., & Griffin, S. (1985). The Satisfaction with Life Scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 49, 71-75. Pavot, W. G., Diener, E., Colvin, C. R., & Sandvik, E. (1991). Further validation of the Satisfaction with Life Scale: Evidence for the cross-method convergence of well-being measures. Journal of Personality Assessment, 57, 149-161. Pavot, W., & Diener, E. (1993). Review of the Satisfaction with Life Scale. Psychological Assessment, 5, 164-172. Pavot, W., & Diener, E. (2008). The Satisfaction With Life Scale and the emerging construct of life satisfaction. Journal of Positive Psychology, 3, 137-152 Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen Tweet " ...we are only confronted with the issue of forgiveness because someone has hurt us...to regain our equilibrium, to be at peace again, we must process the emotions and resolve the situation." Many people struggle with forgiveness. Often, they either are unable to forgive or they forgive too quickly without fully processing their emotions or resolving the situation. In which case, they haven't truly forgiven. Both of these situations involve an inability to navigate the grief process. You may ask, "What's grief got to do with it?" To understand this question, we must examine the nature of forgiveness and the process of grief. Briefly, we are only confronted with the issue of forgiveness because someone has hurt us. Typically, when we are hurt some sort of loss is involved such as loss of trust or loss of our self-image. When we experience any type of loss, to regain our equilibrium, to be at peace again, we must process the emotions and resolve the situation. To further understand this, let's look at these concepts in depth. Why is it important to forgive? To forgive is the ability to pardon an offense without holding resentment. The emphasis in this definition for the purpose of understanding why we need to forgive is on the idea of "holding resentment." Resentment is a chronic state. In other words, we feel it continuously. An emotion such as anger is meant to be felt for short periods to help us process and resolve a situation. However, when we experience anger over prolonged periods of time, our body goes through harmful physiological changes. In particular, high levels of cortisol, the stress hormone, will be released in an attempt to cope with the stress. However, when cortisol is released continuously over time it will contribute to health problems including heart disease. Therefore, forgiveness is important because it takes a toll on our bodies to hold resentment. In addition, the state of holding onto resentment prevents us from being happy. We become bitter and focused on the negative aspects of life. So being unable to forgive doesn't harm the transgressor as much as it harms ourselves. Why do we experience loss when we are hurt? When we are struggling with the issue of forgiveness, it means that we have been hurt. Someone has done us wrong. Someone has betrayed us. Someone we trusted mistreated us. Frequently, people only think of loss and grief when someone dies. But we experience loss in many ways throughout our lives, both major and minor loss. When someone hurts us, we experience loss. This may be obvious in a situation such as divorce. However, other situations may be more difficult to see the loss. For instance, what if someone doesn't invite you to a party? The loss in this situation may be the loss of self-esteem due to the rejection. Or, what if your teenager steals from you? The loss you experience may be the loss of trust. Thus, whenever we are dealing with an issue of forgiveness we are dealing with a loss. Which means we are also dealing with the emotions involved with grief: pain, anger, sadness. How is grief involved in forgiveness? As stated previously, when we have been hurt, we experience loss and need to grieve. For instance, a child may experience loss when they can't have something they want. What do you see when that happens? They get mad and then they get sad. But then they move on (although often it's to the next thing they want). This demonstrates the full, natural grief process even though it might occur in a matter of minutes. By the time we are adults, however, we have learned to suppress this natural grief reaction. We have been punished for getting angry or told that we shouldn't cry. As a result, we often become stuck with grief because we can't release our emotions as we did when we were children. Depending on what we learned when growing up, there are different ways people become stuck in grief. For instance, some people may have learned to "fight back" so they are likely to become stuck in the anger and focused on retaliation. Others may be afraid of their anger so they become stuck in denial and believe that they have resolved the situation: "I've forgiven her. Really!" What are the paths to forgiveness? I make the distinction between different paths to forgiveness because each situation varies and we don't have the same opportunities in every situation. Therefore, we may have to pursue different means to achieve forgiveness. 1) True forgiveness. We are able to pursue true forgiveness if there is true remorse on the part of the transgressor. This is often the easiest path to forgiveness because the other person admits fault, takes responsibility for their actions, and asks for forgiveness. In this situation, we may need to determine the sincerity of their apology, but otherwise we are able to allow ourselves to focus on resolving the emotions. One reason I say this may be the easiest path is because when someone is truly sorry for their behavior, they may be able to accept the emotions we experience. For instance, they might say, "You have every right to be angry with me. I was being thoughtless." Or, "I know you are sad. What I did really hurt you." However, how often do you hear this type of response? When this type of situation does occur, we are able to feel our emotions and arrive at an understanding. Such as recognizing that the other person didn't hurt us intentionally or that they are truly trying to make amends and changing the behavior that caused the problem. Notice that I said "feel our emotions" before we are able to come to a resolution. Even if the other person is remorseful, we can't just move to forgiveness without a release of our emotions. We need to feel the anger. And the sadness. Have you noticed that sometimes when you have been hurt and the other person apologizes you continue to focus on what they did to you? "But you hurt me! You..." Or, maybe you've experienced this when you've apologized to someone else. The reason for this is that you are still trying to process the hurt and release the emotions. Too often, unfortunately, the transgressor wants you to bypass the emotions quickly because they don't want to continue to feel bad or guilty. "I told you I'm sorry. Why are you still focused on this?" Ideally, if the other person could allow you to express your pain and anger, you are likely to come to a resolution more quickly. 2) Acceptance forgiveness. Although the true forgiveness path may be the easiest of the three I'm discussing, it is by no means easy. But in situations where the transgressor does not feel remorse it is even more difficult to achieve forgiveness. How do you pardon an offense when the person does not show remorse and is not trying to remedy the situation? Many reasons exist why someone may not have remorse. For instance, they may lack awareness that they hurt you. This is often the case when the other person may not be hurt by the same behavior. Let's say your best friend dates your ex-boyfriend. If it's a situation where she wouldn't be bothered if you did the same thing, then she really isn't aware that she did something hurtful. Or a person may have hurt you due to some personal limitation such as mental illness or ignorance. I heard an interview with Michael Vick, the pro quarterback who went to prison because of his involvement with dogfighting. He stated that he grew up in a culture where he didn't learn to value animal life. So he didn't know dogfighting was wrong. What impressed me about his sincerity was that he was trying to teach youth what he had learned even though he was not court ordered to do so. This was a situation where ignorance was involved. Once he was educated about how his behavior was wrong he tried to make amends. However, many times the transgressor doesn't ever recognize their mistakes. In which case, we need to deal with forgiveness without an apology or change in behavior. The reason I call this "acceptance forgiveness" is because we need to be able to let go of the resentment even if we can't pardon the offense. We still need to release the anger, the pain, and the sadness. However, we may need to do this through indirect means such as writing about our feelings, or talking to a trusted friend, or punching a bag. Resolution means coming to an acceptance that although you've been wronged, you can move on in your life and not dwell on what was done to you. Usually, by the time you have released your emotions, you are ready to do this. Therefore, the key is to fully experience and release the emotions. 3) Principled forgiveness. This last path to forgiveness is the most difficult. Sometimes we are faced with transgressions which are deliberate and are meant to hurt us. Or sometimes people hurt us repeatedly or even derive pleasure from hurting us. How do we let go of resentment in these situations? I think of these situations as requiring the path of principled forgiveness which means we need to find a higher level of understanding in order to forgive. I call this "principled" based upon Kohlberg's theory of moral reasoning in which we decide upon our moral actions not because we will be punished or rewarded and not because of the impact upon other people, but because we believe in a higher ethical standard of how to behave. In the case of forgiveness, we are not saying "I forgive" because it solves a problem or because we feel better. We say "I forgive" because we hold to the priniciple of forgiving as a higher ethical standard in which we believe. When Jesus was dying on the cross he said, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." I think he exhibited principled forgiveness in this request. However, Jesus also asked,"Why have you forsaken me?" This demonstrates the grief process in which he released his emotions. The emotion of despair is combined anger and sadness. Too often, people want to emulate Jesus in his ability to forgive without realizing that he engaged in the full grief process of releasing his emotions as well. They try to forgive without the release of emotions which only keeps them stuck in the process. I believe Jesus truly demonstrated the full grief process. Buddha's concept of compassion is another example of principled forgiveness. Compassion isn't feeling pity or feeling sorry for someone. That would be included under acceptance forgiveness because it is recognizing and accepting someone's ignorance or limitations. True compassion is the ability to love and cherish all living beings, even those--especially those--who hurt us. Compassion means having empathy for the pain our tormentors must experience or have experienced to treat others as they do. It also means having sorrow that they are not able to experience true joy and contentment in life. The irony of this concept is that the more we are able to feel compassion for others, the more that we let go of our own resentments and develop true happiness in life. Therefore, in the same way, prinicipled forgiveness leads us to contentment. Ultimately, forgiveness is not for the other, but for ourselves. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Jealousy: When the Damage is Done by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Imagine the hopelessness, the hurt, and the pain beginning to turn to anger and resentment. Imagine what this does to love." Tweet An internet reader, "Mike," wrote about a jealousy situation that he has begun to recognize but that has already caused extensive damage to his relationship: "Now, my spouse is hiding everything and refuses to discuss the topic. My gut feeling is that my spouse is out to get revenge, lying and is maybe now really cheating." He indicates that his wife has informed him she has the right to hide the cell phone bills, change e-mail passwords, and erase internet history because of his past behavior. He states,"I tried to explain what is causing my jealousy, yet I feel I'm not being heard or understood. Now, I feel like the one being "abused" because my spouse acts hostile to me and defensive whenever this subject...is brought up." Frequently, I see this scenario all too often in my practice. By the time the jealous spouse recognizes his/her problem considerable damage to the relationship has already occurred. Attempts to change mean not only resolving the jealousy problems but also healing the relationship. To understand the damage to the relationship, try taking the other person's perspective: Imagine day after day being questioned about your whereabouts, your behavior, and accused of being unfaithful or being attracted to someone else. Imagine someone checking your cell phone records, checking your e-mail, and/or calling you frequently under the pretense of something else but really just wanting to know what you're doing. Imagine your helplessness because no matter how much you reassure your spouse, no matter how many questions you answer, no matter how open you are with your daily itinerary or your e-mail, you can never "prove" your love or faithfulness. Imagine waiting for the next accusation, the next argument, knowing that it will occur but not knowing when. For some, imagine being fearful of physical violence because you can't reassure your spouse enough. Imagine the hopelessness, the hurt, and the pain beginning to turn to anger and resentment. Imagine what this does to love. Mike asked a number of thoughtful questions that we will address in this article: Did My Jealousy become a Reality or is it Still My Insecurities Sure, it is possible that Mike's jealousy created the reality of a cheating spouse. The jealous spouse creates a very unpleasant and painful marital environment and some people may try to "escape" the pain of that reality by finding someone else who treats them better. I'm not saying this is justified, but that it can occur. However, at this point, if Mike wants the possibility of saving his marriage, he needs to ignore that scenario and focus his efforts on himself. Therefore, he needs to believe that it is still his insecurities making him feel this way. Instead of believing that his wife is "out to get revenge" he needs to recognize that she has been extremely hurt and may be doing the things she's doing to protect herself from more pain. Frequently, spouses do start "lying" because they learn that when they tell the truth it leads to more questions and accusations. When asked if the new co-worker is attractive, it's safer to say "no." When asked if he stopped any where after work, it's easier to say he had to work late. The lying is often an attempt to avoid arguments. The jealous spouse will often say,"It wouldn't be a problem if he didn't lie to me," but that's not usually not true. The truth usually leads to more unpleasantness. The jealous spouse needs to recognize his/her role in the development of the lying. Once the jealous spouse has caught the lies, then he or she believes that "If my spouse is lying, then he/she is probably cheating." This thinking is a fallacy because it's like saying, "If a person hits someone in self-defense, then he/she is likely to be a murderer." That sounds ridiculous, doesn't it? A minor behavior doesn't mean a person is likely to engage in a major behavior. Some people would argue that lying is not a minor behavior. I would agree that it's not healthy to be lying in a relationship. However, it's important to understand the evolution of this behavior as a protective behavior from the jealousy. It may have been the only thing the spouse felt he or she could do in response to the accusations or even violence. How will I Know the Difference Between Jealousy and Infidelity at this Point? This question is actually at the heart of the matter because it indicates the need to know if infidelity has occurred. In fact, this question indicates that even though Mike recognizes his problem with jealousy and the problems it has caused, he has still not addressed the underlying issue. We cannot KNOW that someone can be trusted and that someone will be faithful, we can only BELIEVE. The jealous spouse wants 100% certainty. They want proof. But faithfulness cannot be proven, it can only be disproved. Therefore, the jealous spouse seeks out proof that a spouse is not faithful and this behavior leads to the pain and the damage to the relationship. Mike has to learn how to trust without proof. He has to learn to CHOOSE to trust his spouse. To do this, he may need to restructure his thinking that makes him believe that he needs certainty. Perhaps he may need to address self-esteem issues that cause him to seek external validation of his worth in a relationship. Mike might need assistance from a therapist to help him identify and change the need for certainty. What Do I Do Now? 1) How Can I Create an Opportunity to Really Talk Things Out? Mike states, "My spouse does not want to go to marriage counseling and believes the problem is one I created and should fix myself." Actually, at this point Mike's spouse is correct. Most likely, she has been accused and blamed so much in the relationship that she doesn't want to focus again on her being the problem. She anticipates marriage counseling as just another way to shift blame on to her. Marriage counseling may be helpful at some point, but not until Mike addresses his individual issues thoroughly. Mike's question involves wanting to "talk things out" but his wife is beyond talk. From her perspective, talk has been the problem. Talk leads to the jealousy and the accusations. At this time, the only thing that can make a difference is to be shown. Mike needs to show her that not only does he understand the problem, but that he has solved the problem. 2) With the Way Things Are, How Can We Create Trust in the Relationship? As indicated above, this is in Mike's hands now. If the marriage can be saved, it's not about "we," it's about him. He destroyed the trust in the relationship and he's the one that must repair it. However, I think the major error he is making is one many people make and that is once they have identified the problem and taken steps to change it, everything should change immediately. Similar to an alcoholic who quits drinking, "I quit drinking. Why is she still suspicious of me and angry?" the spouse who stops the behavior expects immediate changes from his/her spouse. Many times the jealous behavior has occurred over many years. The accused spouse may have heard many apologies and promises to change. He or she may have had hopes that things would change many times previously that were destroyed again and again. Just because the jealous spouse recognizes the difference this time, doesn't mean that all wounds will heal immediately. It will take time. 3) Can it Be Fixed? Most things can be fixed, but when a great deal of damage has been done, the injured spouse may not be willing to try. At this point, since Mike's wife is still with him, it is best to assume that there is still hope. He needs to focus on action. Action in this situation means choosing to trust his wife and not engaging in the jealous behaviors. Action may mean obtaining individual therapy to address any underlying issues that have lead to the jealousy. Action means making amends. Mike indicated that he's feeling hurt by his wife's behavior now, but he needs to focus on what he needs to change. Any focus on what she's doing to hurt him is only another accusation and will further convince her that he hasn't really changed because it's "still about him" and his desire to avoid being hurt. Instead, he may need to recognize that dealing with the hurt she's causing him (by protecting herself) may be part of making amends. He needs to recognize the pain that he has caused and do whatever he can to help her feel good about herself in the relationship. Will that work? Maybe not, but it's a necessary risk if this relationship is to be saved. 4) How Do I Make Amends When My Spouse Won't Talk to Me or Spend Time With Me? Mike needs to understand that his wife is probably leery of talking because most likely much of the jealous behavior involved talking. Therefore, talking even when its about controlling the jealous behavior may be viewed suspiciously. What Miked needs to realize is that his wife is not going to see his progress to the same degree as he does so it will take time for his wife to understand that he has changed. I understand that when we make changes we want others to notice and comment and be pleased with us right away. But with this type of change, which is the absense of a behavior, it takes much longer than when a change involves adding or increasing a behavior. So it is important to have patience. Mike also needs to keep in mind that making amends doesn't just mean apologizing. Another way to make amends is for Mike to do things he knows his wife will appreciate even if she doesn't notice right away. It could mean doing the laundry, or changing the oil in her car, or spending time with her family. It doesn't need to be major things. Frequency is much more important. 5) How Can I Show that I'm Changing When My Spouse Focuses on Every Mistake I Make? Once the damage is done, it is difficult to show change because Mike might be aware that there were ten times when he didn't say anything or exhibit jealous behavior, but is wife will focus on the one time that he did. Since it is impossible to make a 100% change overnight and that even when a person does change they might slip into the old behavior occasionally, the spouse will notice the unwanted behavior and not be aware of the improvement. This means that it is very important to eliminate the behavior even if the feelings can't be eliminated initially because it is the behavior the spouse sees, not the feelings. Also, it is the behavior that hurts the spouse. So, Mike needs to develop strategies to use when he feels jealous so as not to engage in the behavior. Some strategies: Talk to a trusted friend Have someone who already understands the situation to whom you can talk when you are having trouble controlling the jealous feelings and behavior. This person needs to remind you of the consequences of not controlling the behavior. Usually if you take the time to talk it out with someone the feelings will pass and you will be more in control. Journal your feelings. Again, by taking the time to get your feelings out in another way, it can give you a little distance and the feelings will pass. When you journal, you not only write your feelings but you also need to challenge the feelings and write why the feelings are not accurate and the consequences of acting upon the feelings. Some individuals are very good at giving others advice even though they may have difficulty challenging their own thinking. If this is the case, you can write your feelings in an email as if you are writing to a friend. Then send the email to yourself and answer the email as if a friend had written to you. A special thanks to "Mike" for sharing his situation. Copyright 2010 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. and www.excelatlife.com Permission to reprint this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles The Effectiveness of Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for Anxiety Disorders by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The review of approximately 150 research studies showed that 87% of people with Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia improved with only a 10% relapse rate for CBT as compared to a 60% improvement rate with a 35% relapse rate for anti-depressants and a 60% improvement rate with a 90% relapse rate for anti-anxiety medications." Tweet After experiencing severe heart palpitations and shortness of breath while driving, Diane rushed to the emergency room of the nearest hospital. Extensive tests showed no physical abnormalities or problems. She was told she had a panic attack and was given an anti-anxiety medication. As a result of the panic attack, she quit driving by herself because she became fearful of having another panic attack and losing control while driving. Whenever she would attempt to drive by herself, she would have a panic attack. Her family physician explained to her that Panic Disorder was a chemical imbalance and that medication helps to regulate the chemicals in the brain. An anti-depressant was prescribed in addition to the anti-anxiety medication. Diane found that she began to feel less anxious with the medications, but that she was still avoiding the driving due to her fear of having a panic attack. Additionally, she became concerned about needing to be on the medication for a long time and wondered if any other treatment could help. The fear of making mistakes ruled George's life. Everything he did, he checked over and over again to make sure he didn't make a mistake. Sometimes the need to be perfect became so overwhelming that he procrastinated on particularly difficult tasks. This time-consuming checking caused him considerable problems at work because he couldn't complete his assignments in a timely fashion. He went to see a therapist who helped him to understand the history of his fear of making mistakes and how it related to the criticism he received throughout childhood. However, he still was fearful of making mistakes and on the verge of losing his job. He finally quit therapy in frustration. What do these two cases have in common? They are both anxiety disorders and they did not receive the treatment of choice for anxiety disorders: cognitive-behavioral treatment. The treatment they received may have been beneficial to a degree, but it did not address all aspects of the disorder. Fortunately, there is a wealth of research evidence supporting cognitive-behavioral treatment as the most effective treatment for the anxiety disorders, particularly Panic Disorder. However, unfortunately, due to the information explosion and the amount of research conducted every day, many health professionals are inundated with information and unable to be knowledgeable in all areas. Therefore, it is important for the mental health consumer to understand the issues, ask questions, and obtain the necessary treatment. One of the basic issues that is often misunderstood is: how can a non-medical treatment be effective when research has shown that a chemical imbalance is involved with the anxiety disorders? To address this issue, I will first describe cognitive-behavioral treatment, present the research evidence indicating its efficacy, and discuss the distinction between a behavioral disorder and behavioral treatment. What is Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT)? CBT is an active, directive treatment approach to teaching the skills necessary to cope with a disorder of problem. The cognitive portion of therapy for anxiety disorders involves identifying irrational thinking styles that may contribute to the anxiety. For instance, a very common thinking style for someone with Panic Disorder is the belief that he or she is trapped in a situation. This belief of being trapped contributes to the feelings of panic. Another common thinking style for those with anxiety disorders is perfectionism, the belief that one should not make mistakes. Such a belief causes a great deal of pressure leading to more anxiety. Cognitive therapy helps the individual to identify these thinking styles and then to challenge the thoughts with rational coping statements such as "I don't have to be perfect. Everyone makes mistakes." The behavioral portion of therapy involves techniques to address the problem behavior. For instance, the individual may be taught different relaxation techniques to reduce the physical symptoms to anxiety. If the individual is avoiding anxiety provoking situations, behavioral therapy might involve a gradual introduction to those situations with assistance from the therapist. The behavioral techniques are too numerous to describe in this article, but basically they involve doing some activity to address the problem. How Effective is CBT? In an article reviewing the various treatments for Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia (PDA), Drs. Michelson and Marchione concluded that CBT is the treatment of choice for PDA. This conclusion was based on comparisons of CBT and medication treatments. The review of approximately 150 research studies showed that 87% of people with PDA improved with only a 10% relapse rate for CBT as compared to a 60% improvement rate with a 35% relapse rate for anti-depressants and a 60% improvement rate with a 90% relapse rate for anti-anxiety medications. CBT for Panic Disorder without Agoraphobia has an improvement rate of 90% with a 5% relapse rate.* The research findings for Panic Disorder is important for all the anxiety disorders as Panic Disorder is often used in research as the model for other anxiety disorders. Although the effectiveness rates for the other anxiety disorders may not be the same, research is clearly showing the importance of CBT for all the anxiety disorders. However, don't draw the conclusion that medication is an inappropriate treatment. Medication can be an important adjunct to CBT. For many people, it allows control more quickly so that it is easier to focus on the techniques used in CBT. What is the Difference Between a Behavioral Disorder and Behavioral Therapy? Many people get the terms "behavioral disorder" and "behavioral therapy" confused because they both have the word "behavior" as a component. However, they are two very different terms. Behavioral disorder refers to disorders that are due to a malfunction in the individual's behavior, usually implying that the problem is under the individual's control. Examples may include behaviors such as lying, stealing, etc. Anxiety disorders are NOT behavioral disorders. They are mental disorders that have a physiological basis, probably genetic, resulting in a chemical imbalance. Behavioral treatment refers to a treatment method that focuses on behavior or activities that help control a disorder. Just because a disorder can be treated behaviorally doesn't mean that the disorder is "all in your head." For instance, in the treatment of diabetes, the behavioral techniques of stress management can aid in the control of blood sugar. Does that mean that diabetes if not a disease? Of course not. Or, we know that some people can have dental work done using hypnosis, another behavioral technique, rather than chemical pain-killers. Does that mean that pain is a figment of our imaginations? Of course not. Behavioral therapy has many different uses that include pain management, blood pressure control, aid with irritable bowel syndrome, and the treatment of the mental disorders. How does CBT work if anxiety disorders are chemical imbalances? The answer to this question is fairly straight-forward: everything we do is chemically based. Our brain sends messages to the different parts of our body through chemicals. For us to walk, talk, think, or engage in any behavior, chemicals are released to convey the message. We have certain kinds of control over the release of some chemicals. For instance, you may be aware that when you exercise endorphins are released that reduce pain, improve mood, and enhance sleep. Endorphins are a chemical released by the brain and exercise is a behavioral technique. Thus, when you exercise you are controlling the release of a chemical that helps you feel better. Other behavior techniques also impact the chemical balance in a healthy way. It is not clear yet the exact mode of this process; however, research shows that behavioral therapy changes the chemistry of the brain. Recently, research using a PET scan pre- and post-behavioral therapy for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder showed significant changes in the brain.** A PET scan shows the areas of the brain with various colors depicting areas of activity which is related to brain chemistry. Thus, this research shows that behavioral therapy changes the chemistry of the brain. In summary, CBT is a natural means of changing the brain chemistry in order to control the symptoms related to anxiety disorders. References *Michelson, L.K. & Marchione, K. (1991). Behavioral, Cognitive, and Pharmacological Treatments of PDA: Critique and Synthesis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59, 100-114. **Baxter, L.R., et.al. (1992). Caudate Glucose Metabolic Rate Changes with both Drug and Behavior Therapy for OCD. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 681-689. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Excellence vs. Perfection If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Excellence vs. Perfection by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen Tweet Some people may be curious as to why this website is dedicated to the "pursuit of excellence" when I am constantly warning about the dangers of perfectionism. To address this question we must differentiate between the pursuit of excellence and the need to be perfect. These concepts are not only different but can be considered antagonistic to one another. In fact these concepts are so opposed to one another that excellence can best be attained by giving up the demands of perfection. What is perfectionism? Perfectionism is the individual's belief that he or she must be perfect to be acceptable. Perfectionism is black and white with no gray area. Anything other than perfect is failure. Perfectionism is an attitude, not necessarily a behavior. In other words, two people can engage in the same behavior such as trying to win an Olympic gold medal but one can be pursuing excellence and the other is demanding perfection. The difference lies in the thought process about the goal or behavior, not in the goal or behavior itself. What is the pursuit of excellence? The pursuit of excellence is the desire to attain a goal of excellence, to achieve at a high level, to be the best that one can be but without the demand attached to the goal or desire. Pursuing excellence may require tremendous effort and focus as well as other resources. But, unlike perfectionism, it does not demand a sacrifice of self-esteem as it tends to focus on the process of achievement rather than the outcome. How does the pursuit of excellence differ from the demand of perfection? 1) Process-oriented vs. Outcome-oriented. The pursuer of excellence focuses on the process of the task at hand rather than the outcome. As a result, goals typically are performance-based rather than achievement based. For example, in a relationship situation a person may develop a performance goal of "I will make the effort to listen to my spouse more" rather than the achievement goal of "I will stop interrupting my spouse." The performance goal is more achievable because it is always easier to add a new behavior than to stop an existing behavior. However, as you may see with this example, if an individual focuses on listening to their spouse more, they are likely to reduce how much they interrupt their spouse. Yet, setting an outcome-oriented goal of stopping a behavior is likely to lead to more failure and discouragement and possibly giving up. 2) Valuing Self vs. Valuing Achievement. For a perfectionistic individual self-worth depends upon achievement. Given that the achievement goal is perfection which is impossible to achieve, the individual is likely to perceive him or herself as worthless or a failure due to not achieving perfection. However, the pursuer of excellence values him or herself separate from the achievement based upon the effort or the willingness to try rather than whether the goal was achieved. For instance, a perfectionist trying to lose weight may think "I gained weight this week. I can't do this because I'm so weak and lazy" whereas the pursuer of excellence may think "I gained weight this week. I gave it a good effort and I need to figure out how to improve" and is unlikely to negatively label him or herself. 3) Achievable Goals vs. Unreasonable Demands. The pursuer of excellence sets realistic but challenging goals that are clear and specific whereas the perfectionist set unreasonable demands or expectations. I see many women who believe that no matter what is asked of them they should meet everyone else's needs which leads to the stress of not enough time to do everything they believe they should. Therefore, if the demand exceeds the available time it is unreasonable. The pursuer of excellence would examine the situation and make decisions about what is most important to do, where they can set limits by saying "no," and when they can delegate. 4) Assessing Mistakes vs. Criticizing Failure. The perfectionist criticizes him or herself for failure and mistakes often very harshly: "I'm so lazy and stupid." I often confront this self-flagellation with "Would you say that to someone you love? Then, don't say it to yourself." However, the pursuer of excellence is willing to examine his or her performance and personal vulnerabilities so as to improve. Yet, this examination is conducted in a gentle way without harsh labels or comments. 5) Internal Satisfaction vs. External Recognition. The pursuer of excellence focuses on achieving goals to attain personal satisfaction rather than needing others to recognize their success. The perfectionist can only feel good about him or herself when others recognize the achievement. In fact, the perfectionist may be unable to accomplish tasks or goals that don't involve external recognition. For instance, a person who can't achieve sales goals when working for him or herself but is able to achieve the goals set by a supervisor. 6) Risking Failure vs. Avoiding Failure. The pursuer of excellence desires to risk failure because of the benefits that occur from taking a risk. He or she is able to do this because failure isn't personalized and dreaded as a result. However, the perfectionist prefers to avoid failure and therefore often performs at a lower level than he or she is capable. They will often report "I know I'm capable of more. I'm just afraid to try." Their need to avoid failure is due to the high cost of failure to their self-esteem: "If I fail, I am a miserable failure." Whereas, the pursuer of excellence believes "I was willing to take a risk and try something that most people aren't even willing to try. So, no matter what the outcome is, I feel successful because I challenged myself." 7) Partners vs. Adversaries. The pursuer of excellence sees others as partners in the achievement of their goals. They view advice as constructive criticism and seek it out. Whereas, the perfectionist views others as potential critics and fear blame from others. As a result, they avoid feedback and their world tends to be viewed more competitively and adversarial which then reinforces the view of danger from others. For instance, if someone states, "I think if you took this stance when swinging the club you could hit it farther" they would see the statement as criticism saying that they can't play golf whereas the pursuer of excellence would welcome the suggestion and act upon it. 8) Patience vs. Demand. The perfectionist expects goals to be achieved immediately. I frequently encounter clients who express discouragement at about the third therapy session, "I just can't get this. I can't stop the negative self-talk." They believe that if they identify a problem, they should be able to solve it immediately. Whereas the pursuer of excellence recognizes that change occurs with consistent effort over time and have the patience to continuing pursuing goals even when there is not immediate change. 9) Desire vs. Fixed Desire. A statement from the Tao te Ching (which I think of as the earliest cognitive therapy) is "To be given everything, you must give everything up." I believe this statement is indicating the difference between a "fixed desire" and a desire. A fixed desire is a demand or a "should" about our behavior or the world around us. "I should enjoy time with my children rather than being distracted." Fixed desires almost always lead to unhappiness or dissatisfaction because there is an implied demand of "In order for me to happy or okay or good, I should..." But the demand is so unreasonable that it can't be met. Look at the one I wrote above. If a person is thinking "I should enjoy time with my children rather than being distracted" while with his or her children, he or she is being distracted by the demanding thought itself! The pursuer of excellence may have desires such as "I want to be more mentally present when I'm with my children" but these desires are not demands but are achievable goals. 10) Enjoyment vs. Dissatisfaction. Finally, the pursuer of excellence finds enjoyment and satisfaction in the pursuit of goals whereas the perfectionist is usually unhappy or dissatisfied. When goals or risks are challenging and achievable and are not attached to the self-concept they can be fun to pursue. As a result, the pursuer of excellence is often more successful that the perfectionist because he or she is not paralyzed with fear of failure but is able to enjoy the process, and therefore, pursue more risks and goals increasing the chances of success. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety by Monica A. Frank, PhD Coping statements can be part of your strategy to manage anxiety. What are coping statements? When you struggle with anxiety you are usually engaging in fearful and/or inaccurate self-talk which tends to increase the anxiety. The purpose of coping statements is to counter this anxious self-talk. This series provides an explanation of some common coping statements. The best way to use them is to identify the ones that are most calming to you and repeat them over and over when you are anxious sort of like a mantra. Combining a single statement with taking slow breaths can be particularly helpful. Index Coping statement #1: Anxiety is a natural process and won't hurt me. Coping statement #2: Worries are not reality. Coping statement #3: Anxiety isn't always an emotion. Coping statement #4: When anxiety is emotional, listen to it. Coping statement #5: Emotions aren't always accurate. Examine the evidence. Coping statement #6: Judgments from others aren't reality. Coping statement #7: Anxiety needs compassion but not coddling. Coping statement #8: I can let go of demands to not feel anxious. Coping statement #9: Anxiety doesn't mean I'm out of control. Coping statement #10: Having anxiety doesn't mean I'm 'crazy'. Coping statement #11: Expecting panic and anxiety creates it. Coping statement #12: The more I try to control anxiety, the more I create it. Coping statement #13: Tolerating anxiety decreases it. Coping statement #14: Exercise can help reduce anxiety. Coping statement #15: Facing fears really does reduce anxiety. Copyright 2018 by Excel At Life, LLC Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Once we can see our illusions we can begin to see the different sides of an issue and have more empathy when others' opinions and beliefs differ. Then, we may have a greater chance of coming together with solutions." Tweet I have a problemI can't help but see all sides of an issue. I call it a problem because it is uncomfortable at times. It makes it hard to take a firm stand on things because as soon as I hear the opposing argument, I think, Well, that makes sense, too. As a result, I often have to spend time researching things to determine what is accurate. And if I find that both sides have valid points I end up more confused than ever. Maybe, being able to see disparate points of view is due to my training as a psychologist, maybe it is my nature. I tend to think, perhaps, that it existed prior to my psychological training and is one of the reasons I became a psychologistbecause I could understand and empathize with others who were different from me. Even in high school I always seemed to get along with the different social groups. But maybe that part of my belief is just an illusion I've createdto feel good about myself and to protect myself from uncomfortable emotions about the true beginnings of my empathetic nature. Isn't that what we do? Create illusions instead of confronting reality? Maybe I really felt that I didn't fit in anywhere and so I created the illusion of getting along with different social groups. I tried to meet everyone's standard of friend instead of facing the reality that I was an outsider. And so my empathy most likely came from my feelings of powerlessness and helplessness and was forged into an alliance with other outsiders. In the end, though, it allowed me a deeper understanding of my therapy clients. But, who knows? Maybe that is an illusion, too. The illusions we create People don't like to live in a state of confusion. Confusion is uncomfortableit is a mix of all sorts of unnamed emotions. We are fearful of being wrong. We are fearful of being on the outside of a social group. We are fearful of being different or being the one that is labeled bad or evil. We are fearful of not being loved. But all these things add up to not being acceptable in some way. So we try to find ways to rid ourselves of this knowledge and this discomfort. One common way we do this is to create illusions: 1) The happy family illusion. I remember an episode of Cheers from years ago that illustrated this concept so perfectly. Frazier was dating a very young woman who asked him to her home for dinner. During the dinner, her recently ex-boyfriend (who she was trying to make jealous) showed up and they started arguing. Her father jumps up and gets in the middle of the argument. Meanwhile her brother is making faces at Frazier and throwing food at him. During all this chaos, the mother is smiling serenely and pleasantly states, Isn't this nice that we can all be together like this? (Forgive my paraphrasing as I'm describing this episode from memory) 2) The everyone likes me illusion. A person believes that because they don't have conflict with others that everyone likes them. This illusion often coincides with social perfectionism which is the attempt to fit in and avoid conflict by being perfectly acceptable. 3) The if I try hard enough illusion. The belief that with enough effort we can change things to be consistent with the illusion. For instance, a woman in an abusive relationship believes that she can change her husband and have the perfect relationship. 4) The I would never do that illusion. When other people do things that get them in trouble or that are rude or mean, we want to believe that we wouldn't behave in such a way. However, studies have shown that under the right circumstances, more than 2/3's of us will. Milgram's obedience studies showed that obedience to authority was more important than the suffering of another individual. Zimbardo's prison study showed that normal people can degrade into brutish behavior when the norms of society are removed. And Asch's conformity studies demonstrated that people will lie rather than disagree with inaccurate conclusions by a group. 5) The I am right illusion. We insist on believing that our way of life, our opinions, our beliefs are the correct ones and anything that doesn't fit with our concepts must be wrong. There is no gray area or room for differences. 6) The ignore the past illusion. This is the belief that if we pretend past experiences didn't happen or aren't important, then they can't affect us. Yet, the reality is the past is more likely to affect us when we ignore it and don't learn from our experiences. The six R's of protecting illusions But given the nature of illusions, they can be fragile because they are not based in fact but on what we want to be true. As a result, we have to distort reality to protect our illusions and to prevent discomfort: 1) Repetition. We insist that opposing views are wrong, or even evil. Anything that could violate our illusions is considered wrong or misinformed and through repetition we convince ourselves that our illusions are the true reality. 2) Reject. We ignore or reject information that doesn't fit our illusions and we refuse to listen to others' contrary views. 3) Refute. Before we even hear opposing views, we immediately refute. By doing so, we prevent uncomfortable information from eroding our fragile illusions. 4) Ridicule. We label those with different views. By labeling them as misinformed or stupid or evil we can validate our refusal to listen to them. 5) Refuse. We often refuse to be friends or associate with people who have different beliefs. Yet, such a strong stance indicates that the illusion is vulnerable. Is the belief so fragile that differences can't be tolerated? 6) Replicate. We try to make others into copies of ourselves. By controlling others and eliminating diversity of ideas and beliefs we validate the correctness of our illusion. These are all ways to make ourselves more comfortable. Yet, the reality is that different beliefs and opinions can be validbecause they are beliefs and opinions. We can say that the illusions we have created are fact but that doesn't make it so. However, discomfort is more real than comfortat least if we are being honest with ourselves. I tried to teach my clients to be comfortable with discomfort, some even learned to welcome it. Yes, I mean "welcome." For instance, not long after I learned myself to accept and tolerate my emotions, my grandmother died. I found that in the middle of my grief I also felt ecstatic that I could fully feel the grief! I had the ability to feel the loss instead of ignoring and repressing the emotions. Somehow, in a way I can't really explain, it made me feel closer to my grandmother. It was a liberating experience that taught me to welcome my emotions even when they are unpleasant and seemingly impossible to survive. I describe the grief I carry through life (as we all do) as a feeling of a hole in my heart, an emptiness that is always there. Accepting that it is there and won't go away is tolerating it. But seeing it as an important part of me, the part that is my humanity, where I carry the losses I have experienced and that helps me to be empathetic with others who experience pain and sorrow and grief allows me to be comfortable with it because it is an important part of who I am. By doing so, many unpleasant situations become tolerable. I've written much about learning to tolerate emotions and discomfort especially in my mindfulness training and panic management, but being comfortable with discomfort is a step beyond tolerance. Developing comfort with discomfort How can we fully understand the motives of others when we don't fully understand ourselves? We spend so much effort creating a persona that provides comfort that we don't fully see ourselves. We want the world to change so that we can keep our illusions. However, it's only through changing ourselves by letting go of these illusions and becoming comfortable with the reality of discomfort that we can change the world. So, if we want to truly change the world, we need to start with the personal. Instead of insisting that others are wrong, evil, and should change, we need to look at ourselves. Once we can see our illusions we can begin to see the different sides of an issue and have more empathy when others' opinions and beliefs differ. Then, we may have a greater chance of coming together with solutions. 1) Learn to tolerate ambiguity, uncertainty, and discomfort. This is an important first step to eventually becoming comfortable with discomfort. The mindfulness methods can help with this. 2) Recognize illusions. This is very difficult to do because we have spent a lifetime building up the barricades around our illusions. Even, as I tried to illustrate with my personal experience at the beginning of this article, there may be layers to our illusions that we uncover gradually over time. However, only by being able to clearly see illusions can we begin to break down those protective barricades. 3) Stop, listen. Instead of immediately dismissing someone when they disagree with you, especially when it directly attacks your illusions, listen to their ideas. These are opportunities for knowledge and self-understanding. Instead of being afraid of it, welcome it. I know this is hardI don't want to do it either. I might resist initially but then I try to consider it and see if it is valid. 4) Try to understand. What I've learned from many years as a psychologist is that when I know someone's story, I can better understand their decisions and actions. Even when I don't agree with them. You don't have to be fearful that understanding someone's position might change your own. If your position does change, then maybe it wasn't that strong in the first place. Maybe it was just part of the illusion you created. 5) Grieve the loss of your illusions. So many times I have been asked when a client is leaving a spouse, Why do I feel so bad when I am better off? One of the reasons, I explain, is the loss of the illusionat one time they believed they would live happily ever after. So, in many situations, it is the loss of the illusion that a person is grieving. Illusions are often our reality and can be painful to abandon. By recognizing this, it allows you to fully feel and come to terms with the loss. 6) Change viewpoint. All of the above leads to changing your viewpoint about discomfort. However, this is an evolving process and is best achieved by first developing the mindful tolerance of unpleasant emotions. As you do so you will begin to find the purpose and value of those emotions which will eventually allow you to further embrace them. Copyright 2017 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Tweet Rational Approach to the Holidays by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Holidays are often a joyous reunion for many families--a time of happy memories, a time of sharing, a time of renewing ties. Many people look forward to the holiday season with excited anticipation. However, many people look forward to the holiday season with trepidation. Often, holidays are stressful times because problems within families that can be ignored from a distance become readily apparent with the close contact of family gatherings. What is supposed to be a pleasant time becomes a nightmare. Often, the problem with holidays is due to expectations. The family may have an unwritten set of rules or expectations all family members have to follow or receive disapproval if they don't: "Everyone must attend every holiday dinner." "No one must disagree with Aunt Jane." "Arguments are unacceptable." "The women cook and clean up while the men watch football." "Everyone must attend church." The individual then feels he or she must follow these rules because of fear of the consequences. Such consequences include disapproving looks, angry outbursts, the silent treatment, guilt induction, or a myriad of other ways families use to maintain control over their members. These methods of control have been well developed in the family and maintained over many years which seriously hinders an individual from resisting the family norm. Sometimes, individuals who challenge the family rules are labeled as disruptive or "the black sheep." Yet, what one must realize is that it requires two sides to play these games: those who control and those who allow themselves to be controlled. A position of refusing to be manipulated is based on a change in thinking towards the family norms. Instead of thinking, "I cannot upset the family and therefore have to put up with everything no matter how unpleasant," the individual thinks, "I can take care of my own needs even if it causes conflict." For instance, a common problem during the holidays is the expectation of spending the holidays with the extended family. These demands are especially problematic for young families who often attend several dinners in one day just to please all their families. To determine your family's expectations, try to imagine your extended family's reaction if you were to announce, "I'm going to the Bahamas for the holidays." If you imagine your family will be upset or even angry about your decision, how are you likely to react? Do you tell yourself, "I don't really want to cause any problems, so I won't go to the Bahamas?" If you do, consider whether this is a typical pattern for you. What if you received an all expenses paid vacation to the Bahamas? What if your spouse's family was spending the holidays in the Bahamas? The answers to these questions may grant you some insight into your typical patterns related to your family. The above scenario is based on an irrational belief that is called a "should." "Shoulds" are almost always irrational because they are implicit rules of behaving based upon others' expectations and not upon personal choice. Many people argue that we are required to follow such rules because otherwise we are bad people. For instance, "You should not steal." However, in reality, we do not steal because we don't want to steal for a variety of reasons: we don't want to suffer the consequences, we don't want to treat others unfairly, etc. When people listen to shoulds, they allow others to dictate their beliefs and behaviors. This causes a great deal of pressure for the individual due to internal conflict. When a person doesn't want to do something but does it anyway, he or she will often feel stress or anxiety. Eventually, trying to refrain from conflict in the family will lead to problems for the individual of possibly even greater conflict within the family. Steps to Reduce Holiday Stress 1) Consider your needs and desires. Become aware of your needs. Ask yourself what it is that you want. Do this without censoring your thoughts--allow yourself to consider freely your needs. "If I could do anything I want without any consequences, what would it be?" 2) Determine the real consequences, not the imagined ones. Consider that if you did what you want, what the consequences, in reality, would be. Don't catastrophize. Will your mother truly never speak to you again or will she just be disappointed? If she truly will never speak to you again, perhaps it's not a healthy relationship and the holidays are the least of your problems. 3) Rationally assess the consequences. Once you have established the realistic consequences, determine if you can live with them. If the consequence is disappointing your mother and you feel you can't live with it, ask yourself if you are taking too much responsibility for her feelings. She's choosing to feel disappointment because of her own belief system. You are not responsible for that. 4) Examine how to address the problem. If you can live with the consequences, determine whether you know how to implement the behavior. For instance, sometimes a person may be willing to refuse an expectation but not know how to do so without engaging in a battle. That individual may need to learn some assertiveness skills. Assertive communication is voicing your own needs or opinion respectfully without violating the needs of others. Assertion is direct and to the point about your needs. 5) Put your plan into action. Finally, choose to act. You can choose to live with the frustration related to dealing with your family's expectations and suffer the consequences, or you can choose to change your interactions with them. The important thing, however, is to recognize that you do have a choice. Even that recognition can reduce the amount of stress you experience from the situation. The above steps reflect changing the way you react to a situation both cognitively and behaviorally. Cognitive changes involve challenging the irrational thinking that contributes to the experience of stress. Changing the shoulds, catastrophic thinking, and over-responsibility for the feelings of others will make it easier to respond to family situations. Changing the behavior involves learning skills such as being assertive with your family. Other skills to help you cope are relaxation methods and stress-reducing exercising. By combining these cognitive and behavioral methods into a plan for facing the holidays you can significantly reduce your level of stress during the holidays. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Excel At Life provides education to be an informed consumer of mental health services and contains cognitive-behavioral tools to use in collaboration with a health professional. This site provides a number of resources to help you learn about the cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods to assist with anxiety, depression, relationship issues and self-improvement. Although many of the methods can be used from a self-help approach, for more serious problems it is best to have a professional evaluation to help develop a plan of approach. Resources Cognitive Styles Test Audios Articles Cognitive Diary Training Examples App: CBT Tools for Healthy Living CBT Tools for Healthy Living CBT Tools for Healthy Living by Excel At Life teaches you how to use the cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) methods in a simple format. Learn the CBT methods shown by decades of psychological research to be effective for changing your emotions/moods and behavior that contribute to depression, anxiety and stress, as well as problems in relationships, career and physical health. These CBT methods can be used as self-help for minor issues or can be used in collaboration with your therapist to develop a treatment plan best suited to your situation. The Daily Goals feature can be used to record your plan and completed activities. CBT tools included in this app: Cognitive Diary Inspire Diary Healthy Activities Log Mood Log Daily Goals Tests Install Understanding CBT Methods Articles How do we Change Irrational Thinking? What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log The Worry Box Technique Why You Need to Write to Challenge Thinking Measuring Progress Creates Progress Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? This Is Your Brain On Change To Effectively Use the Cognitive Diary Limit Your Evaluation Stressed About Managing Stress? 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety List of Stress Management Methods Understanding Mindfulness Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Step 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Step 5--Mindfulness and Grief Mindfulness Practice Exercises Guided Imagery Mindfulness Tropical Garden The Great Desert Cityscape Day On the Farm Lotus Flower Day of Fishing Create a more mindful life... Effectiveness of CBT Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants Mindfulness Training Shows Promise for Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Treatment Resistant Depression isn't Resistant to Cognitive Therapy Did You Know Psychotherapy has Stronger Scientific Evidence than Many Common Medical Procedures? Binge Eating: CBT vs. Medication How Effective is CBT for Childreb with Anxiety Disorders? Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder CBT Reduces Anxiety During Breast Cancer Treatment CBT vs. Medication for Depression Effectiveness of Online Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Is Mindfulness-Based Therapy Effective? The Effectiveness of Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for Anxiety Disorders Don't Assume You Know What Others Are Thinking and Feeling Often what a person sees in others is their own thoughts and feelings reflected back at them. If they are self-critical, they believe others are critical of them. If they are insecure, they believe others couldn't possibly like them or consider them competent. Read more... Related articles Read Books, Not Minds CBT Training Examples--"Snippy" Email from Friend The Porcupine Effect: Redefining Rejection Changing Irrational Beliefs The Cognitive Styles Test can tell you which cognitive styles may be causing problems in your life. The following articles provide some guidance as to how to change the thinking. Articles List of Irrational Beliefs Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Danger: Negativity Ahead Use Your Head! And Your Heart! But It Happened Before! To Should? Or, Not To Should? Demand Thinking When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Read Books, Not Minds CBT Educational Audios Rational Thinking Improvement Depression Assistance and Education Managing Insomnia Stress Education Choosing Happiness Aging with Integrity 5 Methods to Managing Anger Jealousy Assistance Telehealth withDr. Monica Frank Services Evaluation and guidance using the Excel At Life resources Brief, intermittant model Mindfulness-based cognitive-behavioral therapy (MCBT) HIPAA compliant video or phone sessions About Dr. Frank Licensed psychologist Over 30 years experience Specializes with anxiety and stress Further info Self-esteem Audios Self-Esteem Blackboard Self-Esteem Train Self-Esteem Self-Talk All self-esteem improvement audios Articles 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy Does Loving Yourself Make You a Narcissist? All self-concept articles Sleep Disturbance Sleep problems are often best helped with MCBT. The relaxation, mindfulness, and cognitive methods can help improve sleep quality. Audios Managing Insomnia Mindful Breathing Articles The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Insomnia: Worrying About Not Sleeping Can Sleeping Pills Shorten Your Life? Cognitive Styles Test The Cognitive Styles Test assesses the following styles of thinking to help you address thinking that can contribute to problems. Anxious Style Self-Esteem Style Perfectionistic Style Approval-Seeking Style Demand Style Withholding Style Control Style Dependency Style Externalizing Style Emotional Style Passivity Style Trust Style Blaming Style Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury I refer to illness or injury as an assault on the body because that is how the body experiences itas a threat to the system. Often I find that people suffering from illness or injury (or recovering from surgery) don't recognize that their body has been assaulted. As a result, they tend to downplay the impact the illness may have on their system and ignore their body's need for recovery. However, the body recognizes that it has been assaulted. Which is why it mobilizes all its resources to fight back. Doing so takes energy which often results in secondary symptoms. These symptoms commonly include feelings of weakness, general feelings of discomfort, lack of energy, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, and depressed mood. Read more... Excellence vs. Perfection Process-oriented vs. outcome-oriented Valuing self vs. valuing achievement Achievable goals vs. unreasonable demands Assessing mistakes vs. criticizing failure Internal satisfaction vs. external recognition Risking failure vs. avoiding failure Partners vs. adversaries Patience vs. demand Desire vs. fixed desire Enjoyment vs. dissatisfaction Read article... Emotional Reasoning Emotional reasoning is the cognitive style of believing an emotion is reality without evaluating the evidence. Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Use Your Head! And Your Heart! Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Emotions aren't always accurate. Examine the evidence. When Emotional Reasoning Interferes With Having a Dialog About Micro-aggressions When You Feel Like a Fraud Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training: Giving Women Feedback to Increase Self-Efficacy by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Women tend to be more task-oriented, focused on effort and self-improvement, than men who tend to be more ego-oriented, focused on outcome and winning." Tweet The following article is part of a series of articles that focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Feedback, Self-Efficacy, and the Development of Motor Skills. The manner in which instructors provide feedback to athletes can have significant impact upon an athlete's self-efficacy which in turn affects the ability to learn a skill and the overall performance. Self-efficacy is the athlete's personal belief that he or she has the capability to learn and perform a specific skill or activity. The results of an interesting study by Amparo Escarti and Jose Guzman in 1999 indicated that performance feedback which focuses on providing feedback regarding technique rather than evaluating outcome was related to increased self-efficacy, a higher level of performance, and the tendency to choose more difficult tasks. Other research has shown that a higher level of self-efficacy improves performance. Thus, research shows us that how a coach provides feedback to athletes is critical in the development of the athlete. To make this issue all the more complicated, there is research evidence that women respond differently than men to feedback from coaches. This is most likely a crucial point in the martial arts today because the majority of instructors in the martial arts are men and there are more and more women choosing to participate and compete in the martial arts. Therefore, a martial arts instructor needs to be more attuned to the methods of providing feedback to women in order to elicit their best performance as well as to keep them interested in continuing their training. Frequently in the martial arts, it appears that the focus is about teaching women how to think like men. Some women may be able to make this switch in thinking especially if they learn how to translate the feedback from men's language to women's language; those women are the ones who are likely to achieve the higher ranks. However, many more women who could be physically competent in the martial arts are unable to discover their potential because their self-efficacy is either reduced or at least not enhanced due to the way feedback is provided. The more that instructors learn how to provide feedback more effectively to women, the more their female students will be able to reach their potential. Generally, the research indicates that women are more sensitive than men to criticism, don't respond to social comparison as men do, and respond negatively to high levels of punishment-oriented feedback. Thus, the research tells us what doesn't work for women, but how can a martial arts instructor teach women so they can learn most effectively? The research gives us the clues to answering this question. First, it needs to be clear that the reason women respond differently is because they think differently than men. Men tend to think in more ego-oriented competitive terms whereas women think in more cooperative relational terms. Neither of these ways is necessarily better or worse than the other, they are just different and each has their strengths and weaknesses. The male response to criticism is likely to be the competitive thinking of "I'll show him" whereas women are more likely to have relational thinking of "He's displeased with me and doesn't think I'm capable." The male response to criticism leads to increased effort whereas the female response leads to self-doubt or a decrease in self-efficacy. Even encouragement can lead to this type of response because encouragement such as "You can do this" is typically viewed as being given to someone of low ability. Think about it. Athletes of high ability don't need encouragement because they know they can perform well. However, women do respond well to frequent praise and informational feedback. Since women don't usually think in competitive terms, social comparison has little meaning for them. In fact, social comparison may even be detrimental because she is concerned with the other person's feelings if the comparison is in her favor, and if it is not in her favor, it is perceived as criticism. Women tend to be more task-oriented, focused on effort and self-improvement, than men who tend to be more ego-oriented, focused on outcome and winning. Even men who have the task orientation tend to respond to social comparison. Therefore, women respond better to praise that that is focused on their individual improvement and their performance rather than the outcome and how they compare to others. The task orientation also explains why women respond to informational feedback because it tells them what to work on and how to improve. They feel more in control of their performance whereas as punishment-oriented feedback creates feelings of inadequacy. Many martial arts instructors may ask, "Why should I have to change my approach? Why can't the women change how they think?" Ideally, I would advocate both. In my PsychSkills class at our martial arts school, I teach the students how to change their thinking so that it allows them to achieve their goals. However, as an instructor I also try to adjust my feedback so that it fosters the best learning environment for the student. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Motivation: Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Intrinsic motivation...is an internal form of motivation. You strive towards a goal for personal satisfaction or accomplishment." Tweet "I have so many great ideas, if only I could get motivated." "I do well with deadlines, but I can't seem to motivate myself." "I can't seem to lose weight unless I have someone constantly checking on me and I can't afford a personal trainer." "I would perform better if I could make myself practice more." Do any of these sound familiar? What the above statements have in common is the individual's need for extrinsic motivation for follow-through, the inability to achieve a desired goal unless someone else provides the impetus to pursue the goal. Without the development of intrinsic motivation, individuals have a great deal of difficulty achieving success in almost any area. If you examine successful people, one of the main differences is their ability to motivate themselves. They are not necessarily more intelligent, or have better ideas, or have better luck; they are just able to pursue a goal to its conclusion. What is the difference between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation? Extrinsic motivation is an external form of motivation. For example, if your boss sets a deadline on a project and your bonus is tied to the deadline, that is a very clear form of extrinsic motivation. In fact, this example includes two extrinsic motivators: your boss's expectations and the bonus. So, extrinsic motivation doesn't always have to be another person, but it is some outside demand, obligation, or reward that requires the achievement of a particular goal. Intrinsic motivation, however, is an internal form of motivation. You strive towards a goal for personal satisfaction or accomplishment. You may even work towards a long-term reward such as the development of a business or participating in a competition, but the primary motivator is internal. You may have heard the story about the old man who had an empty lot next to his house. Every afternoon the neighborhood children played baseball in the lot. The old man, annoyed by all the yelling and commotion, developed a plan to stop the children from using the lot. One day while they were playing, he told them that he would pay each of them $5 every day they came to play in the lot. They thought he was a little nuts but were thrilled to be paid to do something they did anyway. After a few days, he told them he couldn't afford to pay the $5 but still wanted them to play in the lot, and asked if they would accept $1. They grumbled a little but agreed to take the $1. A few days more passed and he approached them with an apology telling them that he wouldn't be able to pay them anymore but hoped that they would still play in the lot anyway. The children responded by refusing to play in the "stinking" lot if he wasn't going to pay them. This story is a good example of changing intrinsic motivation to extrinsic motivation. At first the children played in the lot for the enjoyment of it. However, once the man started paying them, their motivator became the money which was extrinsic motivation. Once that motivator disappeared, they no longer had the desire to play in the lot. I experienced a similar situation with a hobby of mine. I enjoyed decorating cakes for family and friends for special occasions. When in college, I decided to make some extra money by starting a business of decorating cakes. However, as the business grew, my interest and enjoyment in decorating cakes declined. Eventually, I quit the business and didn't make cakes for anyone except my son for about five years. I found that as a hobby I did for personal enjoyment became tied to extrinsic reward (money) I began to dislike it and it became a chore or a demand. Therefore, intrinsic motivation is more likely to lead to persistent behavior toward a goal when external motivators are not present. However, as you may realize, motivation needs to be based upon the circumstances and the personality of the individual involved. For instance, some people are satisfied with external reward and demand in a job situation and don't desire to develop personal goals. Or an athlete may be purely motivated by the excitement and adulation of the crowd. However, an individual who desires to achieve goals outside of a structured situation or outside rewards needs to have an intrinsic form of motivation. How does normal motivation develop? Children naturally have intrinsic motivation when born; they explore their environment and discover their abilities for enjoyment or personal satisfaction or mastery over their bodies. However, these explorations quickly become paired with external motivators such as the parent's encouragement or smile. This process is a critical part of development because children need to learn many things and to take risks to do so. Without encouragement they may fail to engage in the necessary exploration. If you notice a child between one and three, you may notice a pattern of exploration in which they have the parent as a home base in their explorations so that they check things out in the world but frequently come back or look towards the parent for additional encouragement. So, in this way the children have developed both extrinsic and intrinsic motivation. The course of normal development allows children to find a balance between extrinsic motivation and intrinsic motivation. Without a proper balance, many tasks will be difficult to complete. For instance, if a child doesn't respond at all to external motivators, and he or she needs to do something unpleasant and undesired, that child is unlikely to engage in the desired behavior. The same may occur for an employee. A person may have trouble keeping a job if he or she has no desire for the boss's approval, doesn't need the money due to the spouse's employment, and doesn't obtain personal satisfaction from work. Such a person has neither extrinsic or intrinsic motivation. What prevents the development of the proper balance of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation? 1) Fear and over-protectiveness in parents. If a parent is too over-protective, the child receives the message "The world is dangerous and you shouldn't take risks." However, as mentioned above, the natural exploration of the world requires the ability to take risks. If the child becomes too fearful, he or she learns to ignore the internal motivators of curiosity and self-satisfaction at mastery of a skill and instead avoids unknown situations or tasks that lead to potential failure. Therefore, the only tasks the child is willing to pursue are those that are sanctioned by the parent, an external source of motivation. Later in life, this individual may continue to need the external motivation of a spouse, coach, or boss to pursue goals due to the fear of risking failure. 2) Non-specific feedback. Many times parents provide their children with a great deal of non-specific positive encouragement or feedback mistakenly believing that it builds self-esteem and internal motivation. For example, "you are so smart" or "you are so good at sports." However, for these positive benefits to occur, feedback needs to be specific: "Your research paper turned out so well because you so thoroughly reviewed the information before you started writing" or "I can see you're practicing your jumps because they are getting higher." Also, if you noticed the above, when you provide specific feedback it is often tied to efforts and behaviors over which the person has control. The non-specific feedback targets factors that may not be perceived under the individual's control, and therefore, less goal-directed behavior may be focused on the desired outcome. How can being "smart" motivate a person? It is more likely to have the opposite effect: "Why should I study more when I'm already smart?" 3) Focus on reward. Too often external reward is used as a motivator which tends to induce the need for extrinsic motivation. For instance, my granddaughter's school in an effort to increase summer school attendance, gives children $100 for perfect attendance. More likely the effect on the children is to desire to attend summer school to get paid. If the school changed it's policy and didn't pay for attendance, children will have less of a desire to attend. Also, given the payment is for perfect attendance, what happens if the child misses a day and there is no other incentive for attending summer school? The more that children are provided rewards for activities that have natural reward (the summer school classes appear rather enjoyable in themselves), the more they will expect reward and be unable to set or achieve goals without that extrinsic motivation. How is too much need for extrinsic motivation problematic? 1) Inability to achieve independent goals. As mentioned above, an individual who needs external motivation may be able to achieve goals set by others, to follow instructions, and to succeed with significant amount of outside structure. However, if they do not also have some level of intrinsic motivation, they may be unable to set and achieve personal goals for which no external force is present. In other words, even if they do well in a structured work situation, they may have trouble following-through with self-improvement goals such as losing weight or increasing exercise. 2) External vs. internal validation. A closely related concept is external and internal validation. External validation is the need for someone outside of you to approve of you or something outside of you to prove your worth. Thus, external validation may be valuing yourself by the amount of income you make or it may be valuing yourself only when someone else acknowledges that you have done well. The need for external validation is a problem due to the effect it has upon the self-esteem. Since we can not always obtain outside approval, we may be unhappy with ourselves when it is not readily available. Whereas internal validation is the ability to feel good about our efforts towards a goal and the belief that progress others may not see is worthwhile. A good example that I see in therapy situations is when people are making internal or cognitive changes which will lead to permanent behavioral changes. However, since family members cannot observe the changes in thinking, they complain that therapy isn't helping the individual. If the person only values what others can observe, they are likely to agree and to quit therapy even though internal changes are occurring. Another common example is in sports. If an internally validated individual is in a slump he or she may understand the process of overcoming the slump, continues patiently with the plan, and soon ends the slump. However, someone who needs external validation may feel more pressure from the outside, be less patient, become more stressed, and is less likely to end the slump as quickly. How do you develop more intrinsic motivation? 1) Develop internal rewards. If you tend to need extrinsic motivation, you can develop intrinsic motivation by initially tying internal rewards to external motivators. For example, if you want to lose weight and you find it helpful to be part of a weight loss support group, you can use that external motivator to develop internal rewards. As you start to lose weight due to the external support, focus on how good you feel physically as you lose weight and focus on the idea that you are losing weight due to the effort you are making. Identify specific changes you have implemented and give yourself credit for following through with these changes. 2) Specific positive feedback. Be specific with positive feedback that you give yourself. Many people who need extrinsic motivation tend to be very negative in providing themselves with feedback. A good way to observe this is to keep a notebook for a week, or even a day, in which you record self-statements about the goal you are trying to achieve. Then review the list and mark whether the statements are negative or positive. Also, indicate whether the statements are specific or non-specific. Most likely, if you are externally motivated, you probably have more negative self-statements which also tend to be very specific whereas your positive self-statements are non-specific. Therefore, you want to make an effort to be more specific in your positive self-statements to develop more intrinsic motivations. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Audio Articles The following articles have audio versions: Anxiety CBT Irrational Thinking Articles Conflict Resolution Happiness Jealousy Relationships Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy Wellness Anxiety 50 TOOLS FOR PANIC AND ANXIETY Describes 50 evidence-based tools from cognitive-behavioral therapy for coping with anxiety disorders. HOW TO MANAGE PANIC AND ANXIETY Explains what panic is and is not, how it is maintained by the anxiety cycle, and some methods to learn how to control it. COPING WITH CHANGE: PSYCHOLOGICAL FLEXIBILITY Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. CBT Irrational Thinking HOW DO WE CHANGE IRRATIONAL THINKING? Provides an overview of how cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) works. 10 COMMON ERRORS MADE IN COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY Discusses how to make CBT most effective by addressing common errors that occur. COPING WITH CHANGE: PSYCHOLOGICAL FLEXIBILITY Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. CATASTROPHE? OR INCONVENIENCE? Examines catastrophic thinking which is the tendency to assume the worst-case scenario is likely to occur. USE YOUR HEAD! AND YOUR HEART! Describes emotional reasoning which is the tendency to believe emotions are accurate without evaluating them. EXCELLENCE VS. PERFECTION Compares perfectionistic thinking with striving for excellence. BUT IT HAPPENED BEFORE! Generalizing is the irrational belief that because something occurred one time it is more likely to occur again. WHEN THE NEED FOR CONTROL GETS OUT OF CONTROL Examines the Internal Control Fallacy of needing to be in control and responsible for everything and the External Control Fallacy which is believing everything that happens is due to luck or uncontrollable circumstances. WHY ARE PEOPLE MEAN? DON'T TAKE IT PERSONALLY Describes the different reasons people are mean on a continuum for unintentional to malicious. UNDERSTANDING AND USING THE COGNITIVE DIARY Describes how to change irrational thinking styles by using the cognitive diary technique. Conflict Resolution WHY ARE PEOPLE MEAN? DON'T TAKE IT PERSONALLY Understanding the reasons for hurtful behavior can lead to greater resolution of problems in relationships. STRUGGLING TO FORGIVE: AN INABILITY TO GRIEVE Discusses the normal grief process and how it impacts forgiveness. CRAZY-MAKERS: PASSIVE-AGGRESSIVE PEOPLE The passive-aggressive style of communication can cause considerable problems in relationships. WHEN YOU HAVE BEEN BETRAYED Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Happiness THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS: LET IT FIND YOU (BUT MAKE THE EFFORT) Discusses the concept of happiness and the common obstacles to achieving happiness. Reviews the methods on how to reduce the obstacles to happiness. HAPPY HABITS: 50 SUGGESTIONS A description of 50 different suggestions that can help create opportunities for happiness. HAPPINESS IS AN ATTITUDE Discusses how thinking, not events, influence overall happiness. SADNESS IS A STATE OF HAPPINESS Explains how all emotions are an important part of happiness. Jealousy REJECTION SENSITIVITY, IRRATIONAL JEALOUSY, & IMPACT ON RELATIONSHIPS Examines the fear of rejection, its relation to irrational jealousy, and how it negatively affects relationships. WHEN YOU HAVE BEEN BETRAYED Talks about how to handle betrayal when it truly has occurred. Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy THE PILLARS OF THE SELF-CONCEPT: SELF-ESTEEM AND SELF-EFFICACY Discusses the different but similar concepts of self-esteem and self-efficacy. Wellness A BRIEF PRIMER ON THE BIOLOGY OF STRESS AND HOW CBT CAN HELP Explains the biology of the stress reaction and how cognitive-behavioral therapy impacts that process at the biological level. THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS: LET IT FIND YOU (BUT MAKE THE EFFORT) Discusses the concept of happiness and the common obstacles to achieving happiness. Reviews the methods on how to reduce the obstacles to happiness. WHY ARE MEDITATIVE RELAXATION AND MINDFULNESS IMPORTANT? Discusses the relaxation and different methods. Good introduction before using relaxation and mindfulness audios. MOBILIZING YOUR BODY'S RESOURCES: HEALING FROM ILLNESS OR INJURY Discusses the natural methods of healing. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Coping With Change: Psychological Flexibility If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Coping With Change: Psychological Flexibility by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "Human beings seem to be hard-wired to resist change. And some people find change more difficult than others. Even minor changes can be disconcerting for those people." Tweet We live in one of the most exciting times in the history of the world. It is exciting because of the rapidity of change. Most other periods of time throughout history there was little change that could be observed in a person's lifetime. Certainly, change occurred but it was cumulative change that did not impact the individual's life to the degree that change does today. For example, I recently reviewed the psychological literature regarding mHealth (using apps and mobile devices for health issues) and what I noticed was that articles from as recently as 2008 could not predict how we would be using apps today! We are living in a time of revolutionary change. However, what is exciting can also be frightening, confusing, and stressful. Human beings seem to be hard-wired to resist change. And some people find change more difficult than others. Even minor changes can be disconcerting for those people. In particular, people who have anxiety or depressive disorders have more difficulty than most with change. I can't necessarily say that learning to tolerate change will decrease depression and anxiety; however, research has shown that psychological flexibility, the ability to adapt easily to change, does increase as CBT helps reduce depression and anxiety (Kashdan, 2010). It seems reasonable that psychological flexibility is related to how people think and as cognitive therapy addresses irrational thoughts the ability to tolerate the discomfort of change improves as well. Therefore, this article is about the thought process involved with changes and how to change that thinking. The Concept of Psychological Flexibility First, exactly what is psychological flexibility? Although psychological flexibility primarily refers to the ability to adapt to change, it encompasses a number of different aspects (Kashdan, 2010): 1) Recognizing and adapting to the demands of different situations. The more rigid someone is, the more he or she tries to apply the same solutions to different problems or events. However, what works in one situation may not be effective in other situations. Therefore, we need to be able to recognize when a situation calls for a different type of response and be able to adapt our behavior according. For example, I have treated many people who have suffered childhood abuse. Often, as a result, they expect certain behavior from others because that is what they experienced as a child. Part of therapy is to help them recognize that not all people are abusive and untrustworthy and to be able to identify the difference between people. Otherwise, they are likely to act in ways that will interfere with the development of healthy relationships. 2) The ability to change behavior when it interferes with successful functioning. Too often people want others or the situation to change rather than recognizing that they only have control over themselves and not others. The more we can be flexible in response to others or situations rather than demanding that things be different, the more satisfaction and success we are likely to experience. Helen Keller, blind and deaf from very young, said When one door of happiness closes, another opens; but often we look so long at the closed door that we do not see the one which has been opened for us. In other words, the inability to accept the loss of one life experience prevents us from being able to see other possibilities. 3) Maintaining a sense of balance in life. For both mental and physical health we need to be able to manage stress. The best way to do this is to take care of our physical and emotional needs. In particular, we need to care for our bodies with proper nutrition, rest, and exercise. We also need a balance between recreation and work or other life purpose. 4) Consistency between our values and our behavior. Many times people experience regret or stress because they don't always act in ways consistent with what is important to them. Inflexibility or difficulty adapting their behavior based upon their beliefs can create emotional distress. For instance, someone may believe in the importance of family time but is unable to set limits on work time. As a result, they experience discomfort and stress due to the conflict between values and behavior. The Inability to Tolerate Discomfort Change involves loss and discomfort. Even a good change such as a desired new job may bring the loss of day-to-day interactions with former co-workers or the normal feelings of incompetence while learning something new or even changes in schedule. Too often we dismiss the losses and discomfort involved with change, especially good change. Yet, these potential losses and discomfort can greatly influence our decisions. Interesting, those people with greater psychological flexibility also have a greater ability to tolerate the discomfort of physical pain. How can thinking differently change the experience of physical pain? Generally, the ability to take a more detached view of the pain experience changes the degree of suffering and improves the level of functioning. The ability to accept the pain and develop a more mindful approach to pain reduces the level of disability and distress (McCracken et al., 2013). The ability to not respond impulsively to make ourselves more comfortable improves the ability to adapt emotionally and socially to situations (Sahdra, et al., 2011). Much of human behavior appears to involve the conflict between short-term alleviation of distress and long-term healthy functioning. For instance, if a person is craving an unhealthy food, that immediate distress can be eliminated by eating the food; however, the long-term consequence may be increased weight and poorer physical health. Or, if may feel better to stop a child's crying by giving him/her a treat, but it may lead to more tantrums and difficult behavior. Therefore, it is important for healthy functioning to determine what may be best for the long-term rather than choosing immediate satisfaction of discomfort. The ability to tolerate discomfort seems to distinguish between those who are happy, successful, and content and those who are not. The problem, however, is that those who are not successful and satisfied often believe that their dissatisfaction is because they don't have enough comfort and pleasant things in their lives. They don't understand that the pleasantness of life appears to be related to the ability to tolerate discomfort and to accept the unpleasant things. Researchers Sahdra and colleagues (2011) showed that intensive meditation with training to not react impulsively can improve healthy functioning. Adaptability and Success The ability to handle changing circumstances appears to be related to more positive outcomes. Researchers found that the ability to adapt could predict success in high school beyond what could be predicted by intelligence or previous achievement. Not only that but more adaptable students had more ambitious plans for the future, enjoyed school more, were more engaged in the classroom, and were less likely to quit when challenged. These students also experienced less psychological distress and greater well-being (Martin et al., 2013). What this means is that being able to accept and cope with change can lead to success, satisfaction, and greater well-being perhaps even more so than life circumstances or personal characteristics such as intelligence. Learning to develop psychological flexibility can be critical to improving overal life circumstances. Can Adaptability Be Changed? For people who have more inflexible styles and have difficulty coping with change, it may seem that this style is a core part of them that is resistant to change. Although it may take some work to develop a greater ability to adapt, it certainly is possible. Promising research involving people with anxiety disorders showed that psychological flexibility increases for those involved in cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). It is believed that not only the active work of changing thinking promotes flexibility but also the behavioral components such as mindfulness and exposure therapy can increase ability to adapt (Kashdan, 2010). Therefore, we can consider psychological flexibility to be a learned behavior although there may be some people who have a more innate inflexibility (i.e. Asperger's Syndrome). How to Become More Flexible The primary methods used in CBT that can help address psychological flexibility and the ability to cope with change are cognitive restructuring, mindfulness training, and exposure therapy. The effectiveness of each of these may vary according to the needs of the individual. It is best to have a professional consultation to develop an effective plan. 1) Cognitive restructuring. Cognitive therapy involves changing the typical thought patterns that cause maladaptive behavior. This is referred to as restructuring. The primary irrational thinking styles that can be problematic for coping with change include: negative evaluation, catastrophic thinking, shoulds, generalizing, internal control, and emotional reasoning. Negative evaluation is the tendency to see the negative aspects of a situation or of others and to expect negative outcomes. Therefore, with changing circumstances it is the belief that the change will result in something bad even if the change itself might be considered good. To change this thinking it is important to recognize that negative evaluation is an assumption not necessarily based in reality. By doing so, you can evaluate the evidence for the assumption and tell yourself what to expect realistically. Sometimes this might mean obtaining additional information to help determine the reality. Catastrophic thinking, an assumption as well, is a more extreme form of negative evaluation. It is the tendency to expect the worst possible outcome. To challenge this thinking it is important to recognize the possibility of different outcomes and that the worst possible outcome may not have a high probability. Again, it may take some effort to obtain additional information regarding the actual probability. Shoulds are demands that you place on yourself, others, and the world. Almost by definition they tend to be inflexible. Certainly, some things in life fall in the category of shoulds but most things do not. Therefore, it is important to determine what is necessary and what is an unreasonable demand. For instance, if you are starting a new job and you have the belief I should know this so I shouldn't ask questions you are likely being unreasonable and the result is more likely to be negative. By identifiying and letting go of unreasonable demands we are able to cope better with change. Generalizing is the tendency to believe that if something occurred previously it is likely to occur again. It is particularly dangerous to generalize failure because it increases the expectation of failure in the same or similar situations. To address generalizing it is necessary to recognize change as a catalyst for new outcomes some of which can be positive rather than assuming that the previous negative outcomes will recur. Internal control can be beneficial in many situations, but when it comes to change, the belief that you should be in control of the outcome no matter what can set you up for failure. Thus, people with a strong need for personal control can have a great deal of difficulty with change due to the unknown nature of change. They may not always be able to prepare when something is unclear or unknown. To manage this need for control you need to accept other outcomes which are not under your control. It can be helpful to recognize that other outcomes are potential successes as well. Just because something isn't under your control doesn't mean it will be bad. Emotional reasoning is the belief that if you feel something, it must be true. With change people often feel out of sorts, confused, or distressed because they are dealing with the unknown, the unpredictable. The tendency with emotional reasoning is to believe that because you feel bad it must mean that the change is bad. This is not always true! Change can be good but still feel bad because it disrupts our routine and our ability to predict. Therefore it is important to evaluate the change independently of how you feel. Don't accept the feelings at face value. The Cognitive Diary is a particularly useful tool to help identify and change these thinking styles. Once you have identified the thinking and developed some coping statements you need to strengthen those statements through repetitionreading, writing, or saying them again and again to yourself. 2) Mindfulness. As people train to develop greater mindful awareness they begin to recognize at an experiential level that negative feelings are due to dwelling on and rehearsing the negative thoughts, beliefs, and predictions of outcomes. As we learn to accept uncritically all experience we develop greater tolerance of discomfort. I believe that mindfulness is also indirectly changing our thinking. As we learn that we can tolerate even uncomfortable experiences we are likely to reduce the negative evaluation and catastrophic thinking styles. 3) Exposure therapy. Many people with psychological inflexibility will avoid situations that create discomfort. The result is usually increased fear and dissatisfaction. However, if instead, they learn to deal with these situations, they are likely to develop a greater belief in their competence as well as reduced negative expectations. Exposure therapy helps to confront the situations that are being avoided in a systematic way. This type of treatment particularly requires professional assistance because when done wrong it can increase the fear and avoidance. Biglan, A., Flay, B.R., Embry, D.D. And Sandler, I.N. (2012). The Critical Role of Nurturing Environments for Promoting Human Well-Being. American Psychologist, 67, 257271, DOI: 10.1037/a0026796. Gloster, A.T., Klotsche, J., Chaker, S., Hummel, K.V. And Hoyer, J. (2011). Assessing Psychological Flexibility: What Does It Add Above and Beyond Existing Constructs? Psychological Assessment, 23, 970982. Kashdan, T.B. (2010). Psychological Flexibility as a Fundamental Aspect of Health. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 865-878. Martin, A.J., Nejad, H.G., Colmar, S. and Liem, G.A.D. (2013). Adaptability: How Students Responses to Uncertainty and Novelty Predict Their Academic and Non-Academic Outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 728746. McCracken, L.M., Gutierrez-Martinz, O. and Smyth, C. (2012). Decentering Reflects Psychological Flexibility in People With Chronic Pain and Correlates With Their Quality of Functioning, Health Psychology, 32, 820823. Sahdra, B.K., MacLean, K.A., Ferrer, E., Shaver, P.R., Rosenberg, E.L., Jacobs, T.L., Zanesco, A.P., King, B.G., Aichele, S.R., Bridwell, D.A., Mangun, G.R., Lavy, S., Wallace, B.A. And Saron, C.D. (2011). Enhanced Response Inhibition During Intensive Meditation Training Predicts Improvements in Self-Reported Adaptive Socioemotional Functioning, Emotion, 11, 299312. Copyright 2013 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles REFERRALS Info about telehealth services with Dr. Frank If you need a referral to a cognitive-behavioral therapist who uses the methods described on this site and included in Excel At Life's apps, tap the ABCT weblink for a referral service or scroll the listing of therapists below for someone in your area. California Colorado Florida Illinois Indiana Iowa New Hampshire New York New Jersey Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Texas Virginia Washington D.C. Excel At Life wishes to provide a listing of mental health professionals who use the cognitive-behavioral methods. If you are a licensed mental health professional, please contact us to be listed (contact form). There is no charge for this service. CALIFORNIA Celine Elise Alvarez, MA, LMFT 3371 Glendale Blvd. Suite 204 Los Angeles, CA 90039 (323) 515-2278 email: celine@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]innergrowththerapy.com website: innergrowththerapy.com Jason Esswein, LMFT 1936 Camden Avenue, Suite #9 San Jose, CA 95124 (408) 975-2982 email: jason@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]jasonesswein.com website: www.jasonesswein.com Cheryl Fink, LMFT 1604 Ford Ave Suite 1 Modesto, CA 95350 (209) 602-9443 website: www.counselinginmodesto.com Heather Lin, M.D. 180 Newport Center Drive Ste 270 Newport Beach, CA 92660 (949) 200-5777 website: www.drheatherlin.com Kimberly J. Herkert, LMFT 2625 Wilson Street Eureka, CA 95501 (530) 870-7519 COLORADO Dusty Powell LPC CACIII Family Integration Counseling Service, Inc PO Box 1241 60615 US Highway 285 Bailey, CO 80421 (303) 838-5406 email: dusty@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]ficounseling.com Website: Family Integration Counseling Specialties: EMDR, Additions & Substance Abuse, Biofeedback, ADHD Additional locations: telehealth for Colorado residents FLORIDA Shawn M. Davis, LCSW 3632 Land O Lakes Blvd Ste 104-1 Land O Lakes, FL 33556 (877) 747-3604 email: shawn.davis@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]renewbodymind.com Website: www.renewbodymind.com ILLINOIS R. Hutcheson, MA, LCPC Certified in Clinical Hypnosis 100 Oak Brook Center Oak Brook, IL 60521 (847) 416-4475 email: marriagetherapychicago@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com Website: www.marriagetherapychicago.com Satellite offices: Winnetka, Chicago, Glenview INDIANA Liz Owens, LCSW 420 E Main St Greenwood, IN 46143 (317) 807-0456 IOWA Timothy Lantz, LMHC 205 North B Street Fairfield, IA 52556 (641)243-8300 email: timothydlantz@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com Website: Timothy D. Lantz NEW HAMPSHIRE Melissa Hamlett, LICSW 32 Main Street, Office 108 Littleton, NH 03561 (603)496-2852 NEW YORK Licensed in New York--can provide online therapy Fanteema Barnes, LCSW The SWEET Network, LLC Somerset, NJ 08873 (908) 445-5325 email: fanteema@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]thesweetnetwork.com Websites: plusguidance.com/fanteemabarneswatson Specialties: Race/Ethnicity Issues, CBT for Anxiety and Depression, Mindfulness, Couple's Therapy, Women's Issues, Parenting Issues, Career/College Issues, Trauma Specialist, Telehealth Provider for NJ and NY Jacqueline Mulone, Psy.D. 61-43 186th Street Fresh Meadows, NY 11365 (917) 519-5475 email: drmulone@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]aol.com NEW JERSEY Fanteema Barnes, LCSW The SWEET Network, LLC Somerset, NJ 08873 (908) 445-5325 email: fanteema@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]thesweetnetwork.com Websites: plusguidance.com/fanteemabarneswatson Specialties: Race/Ethnicity Issues, CBT for Anxiety and Depression, Mindfulness, Couple's Therapy, Women's Issues, Parenting Issues, Career/College Issues, Trauma Specialist, Telehealth Provider for NJ and NY Jude M. Uy, Ph.D. Licensed Clinical Psychologist Montclair State University Counseling and Psychological Services Montclair, NJ 07043 (201)632-5833 email: drjudeuy@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]live.com OKLAHOMA Angela J. Anderson, LCSW 604 S. Classen Ave, Ste F Moore, OK 73160 (405)790-0500 FAX (405)212-4723 email: SilverleafCounseling@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com OREGON Robert W. McLellarn, PhD Anxiety and Panic Treatment Center, LLC 2130 SW Jefferson St., Suite 300 Portland, OR 97201 (971)645-0033 Website: www.anxiety-treatments.com Specialties: treating Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Panic Disorder/Agoraphobia , Social Anxiety and all types of Phobias PENNSYLVANIA Amy Kwiatkowski, LCSW 20 Erford Road Suite 101 Lemoyne, PA 17043 (717) 991-3582 email: Amyk.lcsw@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com TEXAS Michelle Templain-Kuehn, M.Ed., LPC-S 2627 Calder, Suite 200B Beaumont, Texas 77702 (409) 835-1375 FAX (409) 835-1770 email: michellekteach11@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com VIRGINIA Lynn Baez, PhD, LPC 3630 George Washington Hwy, Ste. F-1 Yorktown, VA 23692 (757) 241-818 email: lynn@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]freespiritonline.org Website: Free Spirit Counseling & Collaborative Specialties: We accept clients from age 6 to late adulthood, providing individual, group, family, and couples counseling. I predominantly use Trauma-Informed CBT and MI. Specialties: PTSD, mood disorders, Borderline and Histrionic personality disorders, addiction, chronic pain, Attachment Disorder, Sensory Integration Disorder and parent-child issues. Expertise working with people who identify as LGBTQ. Steven B. Singer, M.Ed., MPA, LPC 21 South Kent Street Winchester, Virginia 22601 (540) 662-2202 FAX (540) 662-7660 WASHINGTON, D.C. Lottena Wolters, LCPC, LPC Capitol Hill Consortium for Counseling and Consultation (CCCC) 650 Pennsylvania Ave SE Suite 240 Washington, District of Columbia 20003 (202)760-2896 email: capitolhillmentalhealth@[inserted to prevent spam--remove when using email]gmail.com Select purpose of contact: To be included on referral list Contact Dr. Monica Frank Suggestions Other Message: Enter email address: Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles General Self-efficacy The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This test measures general self-efficacy which is your belief in your ability to handle situations so as to successfully attain your goals. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy Self-Efficacy: The Key to Success in Sports More questionnaires: Self-Esteem List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Schwarzer, R., & Jerusalem, M. (1995). Generalized Self-Efficacy scale. In J. Weinman, S. Wright, & M. Johnston, Measures in health psychology: A users portfolio. Causal and control beliefs (pp. 35-37). Windsor, UK: NFER-NELSON. Schwarzer, R., & Jerusalem, M. (2004). General self-efficacy scale. In S. Salek (Ed.), Compendium of quality of life instruments (Vol. 6, Section 2A:1) [CD-ROM]. Cardiff, Wales: Centre for Socioeconomic Research, Cardiff University. Haslemere, England: Euromed Communications [CD-ROM publication, without page numbers]. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Motivation Styles (BISBAS) Questionnaire The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses your motivational style, what motivates you. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: Motivation: Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Self-Efficacy: The Key to Success in Sports Staying Motivated with a New Exercise Program An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success What Are Reasonable Goals? How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance More questionnaires: Self-Efficacy List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 319-333. More Info Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. People often are surprised when they feel grief at the death of an abusive spouse or parent. "Shouldn't I feel satisfied or relief? they often ask. Tweet People often are surprised when they feel grief at the death of an abusive spouse or parent. Shouldn't I feel satisfied or relief? they often ask. Actually, due to the complexity of emotions associated with grief they usually do feel a mix of emotions including relief. But they frequently feel blindsided by the intense sadness of grief when the person who is gone caused them so much pain. Grief is due to loss. People understand physical loss in the sense that the person is no longer there. Yet, loss is more than the physical absence of someone. Psychological loss can be even worse. In fact, even when a much beloved person dies most of the loss we feel is psychological. Some is physical such as the loss of physical contact but much of it is psychological. That doesn't mean it is imaginary but that it concerns intangible aspects of loss such as loss of support. When an abuser dies or leaves the psychological loss can feel even more confusing. Frequently, they don't get support for their grief because people see them as better off: My friends are so happy I left him, but I just cry all the time. However, as with all grief, it is crucial to process it which means to feel it and understand it fully so that true acceptance can lead to peace and a greater awareness of oneself. Psychological losses when an abuser dies or leaves 1) Loss of what could have been. When people choose to be in a relationship, they don't choose it with the anticipation of being abused. No, abuse is the farthest thing from their minds. Instead, they have hopes and desires for a future with someone. When that person dies or leaves they feel the loss of all those shattered dreams. In the case of an abusive parent, children often grow up wishing for parents like other children seem to have. Or, they are desperately seeking the approval of the abusive parent. Either way, once that parent dies they feel the loss of what they never had but wanted so badly. 2) Loss of an illusion. Sometimes the way people cope with abuse is to ignore it, explain it away, or repress it. I have literally seen the transformation in my office where one week a woman comes in with a black eye, the next week she minimizes it, and a month later she doesn't even remember when I inquire about it. This especially occurs when abuse is a cycle rather than a constant. She holds on to the illusion that everything is good instead of recognizing the pattern of abuse. So at the loss of the abuser she is really grieving the loss of the illusion she had created to survive. The same can occur with parents. Individuals in dysfunctional family systems often describe having a close family. Yet, when they describe the family interaction, their depiction is one of control, criticism, and manipulation. So when an abusive parent dies, the grief they experience is the loss of the illusion of the close family. 3) Loss of a promise. Frequently, abusers promise to do better. They recognize how they have hurt their loved one. Unfortunately, promises often don't come with behavior changes. The person may try to not be abusive but they don't actively seek out help to change. As a result they return to the abusive behavior especially when under stress. When that person dies the promise of change is gone too. Another type of a loss of a promise is the breaking of vows and betrayal in a marriage leading to divorce. 4) Loss of time. When an abuser is gone, a person may become acutely aware of how much time was wasted with the relationship. They may have spent years trying to resolve the problems in their marriage or trying to get the approval of an abusive parent while feeling shame or blame for the abuse. With the loss of the abuser they may be confronted with the amount of effort and time they lost trying to change an unchangeable situation. Hopefully, this recognition can lead to an understanding that they couldn't change it because they weren't the cause of it. 5) Loss of the good aspects of the person. Seldom is a person 100% bad or abusive all the time so grief may occur due to the loss of the good parts of the relationship. This type of loss can also be difficult to obtain support from others during the grief because they may not have seen the positive aspects of the relationship. As a result, the person may not be able to share with others the good memories as occurs with normal grief. Instead, they may feel shut down due to comments such as You are better off now. 6) Loss of ever being able to understand why the person was so hurtful. I've seen people sit by the bedside caring for the abuser as he or she died while questioning why they did so. I think frequently the reason was the hope that somehow all would be explained to them. Or that the abuser would take responsibility at the last moment and absolve them of feeling guilt or shame. As this rarely occurs, the loss a person feels is not understanding why. This can be very troublesome for abuse survivors as the tendency is to blame the self especially when the abuser faulted them: I wouldn't need to be so critical if you could think for yourself! 7) Loss of their hope for the future. I've seen people living their lives with the belief that once the abusive person is gone, their life will be better. However, living life waiting for someone to die or leave is not living. So when the abusive person is out of their life they find that life hasn't magically gotten better. In all that time they never worked on themselves to address the impact of the abuse. Abusive people can have a hold on a person beyond the grave. If the abuse isn't dealt with, the person continues to feel the pain and misery. 8) Loss of the object of anger. Sometimes having a focus for anger helps people cope. Sometimes too well because anger can be protective from the more intense emotions of the grief about the abuse and the person may stay stuck in the anger. When the abuser is gone it may become more difficult for some to remain angry. Without anger to sustain them they may begin to feel the grief of their abuse. So the loss of the object of the anger leads to feeling the more intense emotional pain associated with the abuse. This grief is more indirectly related to the loss of the abuser because it is more about the losses caused by the abuse itself. However, by addressing it the survivor can come to a resolution of the abuse which allows for living a more satisfying life. What can be done about these types of psychological losses? 1) Recognition. Sometimes just knowing why you are feeling grief can aid in the grief process. So often people feel there is something wrong with them for feeling so sad or even devastated by the loss especially since those around them don't understand why they are grieving. So knowing that feeling grief at the loss of an abuser is normal can allow them to process the grief and move forward. 2) Challenge inaccurate thinking. Survivors of abuse often feel guilt or shame. With grief they may believe I didn't do enough or if only I had... The thinking that leads to these feelings needs to be challenged by telling themselves again and again I am not responsible for how this person treated me. Although it is normal to feel grief for the reasons described above, the feelings of blame or shame are due to the abuse and need to be dispelled. 3) Feel the grief. Feeling grief is unpleasant and the natural tendency is to avoid it. This is even more true when the loss involves an abuser. However, feeling the grief allows you to resolve it. I have found that writing grief letters can be a helpful way to process the grief. These are letters not meant to be sent or shown to others so that you don't censor your emotions. Letters seem to be better for processing than just journaling about the grief because in your mind it feels like you are talking to the person. Such letters can be quite emotional so it is important to have support and guidance when you choose to do this. 4) Therapy. If a person continues to struggle grief therapy should be considered. When support from family and friends can't be obtained, therapy can help process this type of grief. A therapist who has experience with abuse survivors is often best because they are most likely to understand the complexity of the emotions that occur with this type of grief. Also, recognize when you need help not just for the grief but for how the abuse impacted you. Use the grief to motivate you for change and to address the associated issues such as with anxiety, depression, self-esteem and/or relationship problems. Copyright 2018 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Hot Springs Relaxation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Hot Springs Relaxation with Music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Hot Springs Relaxation This audio relaxation exercise focuses on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes sitting in a hot spring in the wintertime, feeling the contrast of the cold air with the hot water, and the soothing flow of water against your body. At the end of the audio it provides an opportunity for creating healthy suggestions for yourself as you relax by the fire next to the hot spring. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This audio may be used for sleep. Just allow yourself to gently drift off. You may awaken whenever you are ready. Relaxation at bedtime allows for a more restful sleep. Additional reading: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Tweet Questions and Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Does Mindfulness Make You Good? No, but Does It Matter? The Time to Relax is When You Don't Have the Time List of Stress Management Methods Stressed About Managing Stress? Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists Mindfulness is Simply Being Without Judgment Mindful Passion Mindfulness: What's in a Name? Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants The Mindful Journey The Benefits of Mindfully Washing Dishes The Difference Between Mindful Focus and a Mindful Attitude Mindfulness Training Shows Promise for Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Mindfulness and Managing Chronic Pain How We Might Stop Bullying: Kindness Curriculum for Preschoolers Practicing Loving-Kindness May Elicit Resentments How Mindfulness Can Reduce Risk for Alzheimer's and Heart Disease Mindful Attention to Unhealthy Foods Improves Food Choices Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong Mindful Dating: How Does Mindfulness Affect Satisfaction in Relationships? 10 Everyday Frustrations and a Mindful Attitude What is the Difference Between Mindful Acceptance and Emotional Suppression? Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder The Paradox of the Mindful Attitude The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Addiction to Emotions and Mindfulness Practice Mindfulness Practice is Not Focusing, It is Re-Focusing How Much Should You Practice Mindfulness? For Fun--Try Being Mindful About the Weather What Could Be More Mindful Than a Cat Watching Bird Videos? Wisdom Doesn't Come In Sound Bites Qigong Can Reduce Depression Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Acceptance as the Basis for Wisdom? I want to feel good NOW! The 20-Minute a Day Miracle Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Being Mindful of Emotions Decreases Intensity Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Mindfulness and Flow in the Workplace Mindfulness May Prevent Relapse Is Mindfulness-Based Therapy Effective? Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood Mindfulness Skills Can Improve Relationships Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Cognitive Styles How do we Change Irrational Thinking? Provides an overview of how cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) works. Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log The Mood Log feature of the app not only gives you a place to record your daily moods but it will provide an analysis of how different activities or events can impact your moods. What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Discusses expectations of MCBT and how to assess your efforts when practicing the methods. Does Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Lack Compassion? It Depends Upon the Therapist Discussion of a complaint made by some people regarding their experience with CBT and explains what to look for in a CBT therapist. 10 Common Errors Made In Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Discusses how to make CBT most effective by addressing common errors that occur. Coping With Change: Psychological Flexibility Discusses the concept of adapting to change and how CBT can improve psychological flexibility. The Effectiveness of Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for Anxiety Disorders Describes research showing the effectiveness of CBT compared to medication. Making Attributions for a Healthier Attitude Discusses how people tend to explain behavior and inaccuracies that can occur. Lies, Damned Lies, and Statistics Explains problems that occur in the popular media when sharing statistics regarding health issues. Rational Approach to the Holidays Holidays can be stressful for many people. This article discusses how changing thinking can reduce the stress. Cognitive Styles List of Cognitive Styles A list of the irrational beliefs used in Excel At Life's cognitive diary examples and apps. Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? Examines catastrophic thinking which is the tendency to assume the worst-case scenario is likely to occur. Danger: Negativity Ahead Discusses the danger of engaging in negative thinking about the self, others, and situations. Use Your Head! And Your Heart! Describes emotional reasoning which is the tendency to believe emotions are accurate without evaluating them. Excellence vs. Perfection Compares perfectionistic thinking with striving for excellence. But It Happened Before! Generalizing is the irrational belief that because something occurred one time it is more likely to occur again. When the Need for Control Gets Out of Control Examines the Internal Control Fallacy of needing to be in control and responsible for everything and the External Control Fallacy which is believing everything that happens is due to luck or uncontrollable circumstances. Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Describes the different reasons people are mean on a continuum for unintentional to malicious. Read Books, Not Minds Discusses the irrational belief that others should know what you want or what you are feeling without telling them directly or that you know what others are thinking or feeling. To Should? Or, Not To Should? Demand Thinking Describes irrational thinking of shoulds or demands/expectations which are often perfectionistic or critical in nature. CBT Techniques Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary Describes how to change irrational thinking styles by using the cognitive diary technique. The Worry Box Technique Describes how to reduce worry/anxiety by examining the importance of the worry and what can be done to manage the worry. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles When Is Jealousy Irrational? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Jealousy is an emotion based upon loss or the fear of loss such as a relationship or friendship. Often, the individual experiences negative thoughts and feelings of insecurity." Tweet All emotions are normal. An emotion in and of itself is not irrational. However, what we decide based upon our emotions can be irrational and lead to destructive behavior. Although certain behaviors related to an emotion can create problems, the emotion itself may have some validity. The purpose of emotions is to provide us with information. Once we have the information, we may then choose appropriate action. However, as with any information, emotions may be misunderstood. How we make sense of an emotion may not always lead to the accurate meaning of the emotion. Therefore, our chosen actions may not resolve the problem the emotion brought to our attention, or may even create additional difficulties. For example, let's look at the emotion of anger. Let's imagine a situation where a person is excluded from some event such as not being invited to a wedding. In that situation, it may be normal for the person to be hurt and angry. "How could she not invite me? I've always been there for her." Thus, the information the anger provides is that the friend feels rejected and left out of an important event. If the person recognizes this information, he may decide to respond by contacting his friend and communicating how he feels: "I don't understand why I wasn't included." In which case it is possible he might find out that the slight was unintentional, or there was a reasonable explanation, or maybe his friend has a problem with him that she hasn't addressed. No matter what the situation, it gives him an opportunity to confront the situation and try to resolve the problem. However, what if he misinterprets the anger: "She's always leaving me out. She doesn't really care about me" and convinces himself to reject her in turn. What if he decides to go as far as writing a scathing letter about how ungrateful and inconsiderate she is and sends it to her right before her wedding? The first reaction to anger was based on rationally interpreting the anger and responding reasonably. However, the second response was an irrational interpretation which may lead to damaging the relationship beyond repair. In this article, we will examine the emotion of jealousy similarly and identify when it is irrational. In addition, we will look at other meanings of the emotion of jealousy and how to determine what the feeling is indicating. Finally, we will examine the causes of irrational jealousy and focus on methods of learning how to handle jealousy when it is irrational. What is Jealousy? Jealousy has long intrigued and devastated humankind. If you examine classics of literature or even the Bible you will find numerous tales of jealousy and revenge. Early in the 1900's researchers were examining jealousy in college students. One reviewer of this research stated,"...jealousy is a fundamental instinct that bears strong resemblance to anger, fear and grief and shows relationship to the proprietary instinct. It is a safeguard against the social instinct, and mutual aid forms a strong off-set to jealousy (Withey, 1907)." In other words, jealousy is a basic instinct related to the need to possess especially within relationships and that the more people try to help one another rather than compete, the less jealousy is experienced. Jealousy is an emotion based upon loss or the fear of loss such as a relationship or friendship. Other emotions such as anxiety, anger, grief, or sadness are typically present. Often, the individual experiences negative thoughts and feelings of insecurity. Although very similar, jealousy and envy are not considered the same emotion. Jealousy relates to the loss of something the person already possesses whereas envy is the desire for something the person does not possess. However, it can be argued that in some circumstances jealousy and envy may be virtually identical. For instance, if a person was passed over for a promotion, she may feel envious towards the co-worker who received the promotion. Since she didn't lose something she already possessed (her job), it wouldn't be considered jealousy. However, we could state that she did lose something in her possession such as her sense of adequacy or competence that the promotion represented. In which case the feelings towards the co-worker could be considered jealousy. Therefore, even though scientific research makes a distinction between jealousy and envy, I think for the purposes of this article we will use both terms because many of the issues we cover will be very similar, if not identical. When is Jealousy a Normal Emotion? As stated previously, all emotions are normal. Jealousy is a normal emotion. Imagine that a woman just found out that her husband decided to leave her for another woman. Naturally, she may feel jealous of the other woman. In this instance, the jealousy she experiences is part of the grieving process for her. Her anger and jealousy is directed at the object of her husband's attentions. Or, for instance, many adolescent girls experience intense emotions in their friendships such that if a friend chooses to spend more time with another friend they may experience rejection, loss, and jealousy. Unfortunately, if they do not have assistance developing methods of resolving this issue, they are likely to permanently destroy the friendship due to the resentment and jealousy. However, in fact, this normal jealousy is an important experience in learning to develop emotionally mature relationships. Most adolescents eventually learn that the situation is not truly rejection and that they haven't lost the friendship. They learn that another person may have room for more than one close friendship. However, some individuals do not learn this lesson and will continue to develop emotionally immature relationships into adulthood. As you may notice from these examples, the common feature of normal jealousy is that the intensity decreases over time and that it lasts only a short while. Such is true of most normal emotions. Now, certainly the length will vary depending upon the circumstances, but eventually the person resolves the emotion and psychologically moves on. However, with irrational jealousy the individual can remain stuck in the emotional experience for an indeterminate amount of time. In fact, without specific efforts to change, it may never change. What is the Purpose of Normal Jealousy? 1) Motivation to Improve. As with any emotion, normal jealousy tells us to examine a situation or ourselves more closely. It may help us to become more aware of our own insecurities so that we can address them. 2) Motivation to Resolve a Problem. Or, it may tell us that someone is treating us in a way that is hurtful. For example, every time a woman is out with her husband, he is checking out other women and flirting with them. The woman may find that she is jealous of the other women. But if she examines the situation, the jealousy may be telling her that she is hurt that her husband isn't wanting to give her attention and that he's not concerned about her emotions. This recognition gives her the opportunity to discuss her feelings with him and hopefully resolve the problem. 3) A Warning. Another purpose of jealousy can be to warn us about a potential loss. Throughout the history of humanity, it has been necessary to develop social relationships so as to survive. In that framework, it makes sense that people would develop jealousy as a way of warning them to protect their resources to improve chances for survival. As with many evolutionary behaviors, jealousy may not be as necessary for survival but it is still a thriving force within our social groups. In terms of warning, if we look at the above situation again, the woman's jealousy may have been trying to communicate the possibility that her husband might leave her. However, we have to be careful with this interpretation because without additional evidence it could easily become irrational jealousy. Therefore, it may be advisable for her to check out her emotions with him,"I fear that you might leave me when you give other women so much attention." His response may give her an idea as to the accuracy of this emotional warning. What is Irrational Jealousy? Irrational jealousy, also referred to as morbid jealousy in the psychological literature is when the jealousy isn't based upon evidence or if the person's jealousy is out of proportion to the situation. In addition, it is more than a fleeting emotion. Usually, the person not only dwells on the jealousy, but will also engage in some sort of negative behavior. For example, a man who believes that his wife is flirting with every man she talks with when she is just engaging in normal interaction may be experiencing irrational jealousy. He not only constantly thinks, or obsesses, about her interactions with other men, but also questions her excessively about every detail of her day. At first, she may reassure him and tries to not talk to other men but eventually finds that no amount of reassurance changes the situation. She is likely to become angry and resentful which could cause that which he fears--her leaving him. Another example (although this is really about envy) is someone who obsessively focuses on her neighbor's life and negatively compares herself to the neighbor. However, she may also view the neighbor as undeserving of her good fortune and engages in negative gossip with other neighbors which is a form of retribution, a behavior often seen with jealousy or envy. What are the Problem Behaviors that Occur with Irrational Jealousy? 1) Violence. The behavior of greatest concern is the potential for violence. Generally, it has been understood that much violence against women has been due to jealousy. However, actual research evidence of the mechanism of jealousy and violence has been difficult to obtain. DeSteno et.al.(2006) showed that jealousy can create aggression. As it is difficult to directly create jealousy and aggression in the research lab, not many experiments have been conducted to research how jealousy leads to aggression. However, researchers DeSteno et.al.(2006) developed a creative method of using hot sauce as the tool of aggression and giving the spurned partner an opportunity to inflict retribution on the other without anyone knowing. As a result, they clearly demonstrated that rejected individuals were more likely to aggress against the person who rejected them. They also showed that the aggression depended upon a decrease in self-esteem which caused increased feelings of jealousy. In other words, it is important to note, that those who did not experience a decrease in self-esteem were not likely to aggress nor were those who experienced a decrease in self-esteem but no jealous feelings. 2) Stalking. Related to the issue of violence is stalking behavior which is an attempt to possess someone whether through trying to convince the other of his/her devotion or through more direct methods of control. As indicated in Stalking: Perspectives On Victims and Perpetrators (2002) the need for control is a core feature of stalking behavior. In addition, the individual is likely to experience a pattern of anxious attachment with feelings of anger and jealousy. 3) Retribution. Another form of aggression against someone is retribution. However, retribution doesn't have to be direct violence but can be more subtle passive-aggressive behavior such as the gossip example. In fact, these days with the social-networking sites retribution has become too easy because people are able to post hurtful comments about others that may have remained more private in previous decades. Retribution often causes situations to escalate rather than be resolved. Imagine a situation where a husband has irrational jealousy about his wife, has the password to her Facebook page and posts negative comments in her name to her male friends. 4) Obsessive Talking or Questioning. A very common behavior associated with jealousy is obsessive talking about the object of the jealousy or questioning someone excessively to determine if their irrational beliefs are accurate. The problem with this questioning is that there isn't a way to prove that something didn't happen. Therefore, the questioning just continues because the person is never reassured. 5) Distrust. Another consequence of jealousy is distrust which is an unpleasant state and not conducive to the development of healthy relationships. Causes of Irrational Jealousy 1) Fear of Loss. The most common feature of irrational jealousy is the fear of loss. This loss can take many forms but generally falls into the categories of loss of power, loss of self-worth, or loss of sense of self. Loss of power may be a person who perceives his rival as having more financial influence. I remember years ago Ted Turner stating that all the top multi-billionnaires were afraid of making substantial charitable contributions because of fear of losing their standing among who is the most wealthy in the world. He suggested that they all agree to giving away the same amount so that their standing would remain the same. That way they could be philanthropists and do good works without having to sacrifice their influential power. Or perhaps they viewed their place on the records as a measure of self-worth which is another type of loss of which people are afraid. And finally, the third type of loss is that of sense of self. An example of this may be a man who views himself as the provider for his family and is fearful of losing his wife and family. 2) Inadequacy. Individuals who view themselves inadequate in comparison to someone else or some personal standard are more likely to experience jealousy or envy. Researchers from Northeastern University (DeSteno et.al., 2006) found that threatened self-esteem is a primary contributor to irrational jealousy. Individual's whose self-esteem is based upon an external source such as a relationship may be more susceptible to irrational jealousy because external sources of self-esteem are more difficult to protect. Whereas those who have self-esteem that is based upon love and acceptance of themselves are less vulnerable to loss of self-esteem and, as a consequence, less likely to be jealous. 3) Fear of Feeling. Although none of us enjoy unpleasant feelings, many people with irrational jealousy are particularly fearful of feeling rejection or betrayal and take extreme measures to try to avoid these feelings. Unfortunately for them, their jealous behaviors may often create what they are trying to avoid. The fear or sensitization to feelings may arise from previous experiences such as rejection in childhood or a previous spouse who betrayed them. 4) Delusions. In a small subset of people with jealousy problems, the cause may be based in delusions. As such, it indicates the individual may have a serious mental illness such as paranoid schizophrenia. One primary way of determining the difference between irrational jealousy and paranoia is that the person with delusions firmly believes the reality of that belief. Whereas an individual with irrational jealousy is more likely to say,"I know I'm being unreasonable and that it's creating problems but I just can't help myself--it's how I feel." 5) Obsessions. In another subset of people, the cause may be obsessional beliefs with a basis in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder(OCD) or, even more likely, Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder(OCPD). In these individuals, the above causes of jealousy such as fear of loss, inadequacy, and fear of feeling may be presented but they are wrapped in a layer of obsessions. These individuals are still connected with reality but may have what is known as "overvalued ideation" which means they may have increased difficulty recognizing the irrationality of their jealous ideas. What Can be Done About Irrational Jealousy? The approach to dealing with irrational jealousy depends upon the underlying cause: 1) Mental illness. If the jealousy is delusional it is necessary to have psychiatric assistance and medication to control the delusions. Individuals with OCD or OCPD need, at a minimum Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) and may also benefit from medication. 2) Inadequacy. For problems of inadequacy, the individual needs to address the self-esteem issues. For some people, this is fairly straight-forward as they recognize the low self-esteem. In which case, using the cognitive-behavioral tools of learning to challenge irrational thinking can be effective (see How Do We Change Irrational Thinking and Understanding and Using the Cognitive Diary). For others it may be more difficult as they do not recognize the self-esteem problems and may insist that they feel good about themselves. They may need to do more work towards developing greater insight into themselves. 3) Fear of Feeling. Individuals who are afraid of feeling taking extreme measures to avoid feeling bad need to learn how to address grief. They may benefit from grief counseling as well as CBT to address the irrational fear of feeling. It is likely that they have had past grief experiences that have been unresolved. For instance, a woman may have had a previous husband who was unfaithful and now has excessive jealousy regarding her present husband even though he has given her no reason to be jealous. She may not have adequately dealt with her previous grief and it is being expressed in her current relationship through the jealousy. 4) Fear of Loss. The issue of fear of loss is addressed in a similar manner as to the fear of feeling. The main difference is that the fear of loss is future- oriented as if the person is grieving something that hasn't occurred yet. It also can have its roots in previous grief experiences. Thus, addressing the irrational beliefs and learning to deal with grief is important. References Davis, K.E. (Ed); Frieze, I.H. (Ed); Maiuro, R.D. (Ed), (2002). Stalking: Perspectives on victims and perpetrators, (pp. 237-264). New York, NY, US: Springer Publishing Co. DeSteno, D., Valdesolo, P, and Bartlett, M.Y. (2006). Jealousy and the threatened self: getting to the heart of the green-eyed monster. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 626-641. Withey, D.L. (1907). Psychological Literature, 141-142. Review of: Gesell, A.L. (1906). Jealousy, American Journal of Psychology, 17, 437-496. Copyright 2011 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. and www.excelatlife.com Permission to reprint this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Willoughy Social Anxiety Scale The following questionnaire is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses the degree of social anxiety that you experience. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: The Porcupine Effect: Pushing Others Away When You Want to Connect 20 Steps to Better Self-esteem Why Social Anxiety Disorder may be Created by Culture Can Being Shy Affect Your Well-being and Relationship? Yes, but It Depends... Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Can Facebook Make You More Anxious When Meeting Someone? Social Anxiety and Bias in Forming Impressions Acts of Kindness and Social Anxiety How Do You Handle Rejection? The Pesky Chemical Causing Social Memory Problems Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability More questionnaires: Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire List of PsychTests Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Wellness Articles A BRIEF PRIMER ON THE BIOLOGY OF STRESS AND HOW CBT CAN HELP Explains the biology of the stress reaction and how cognitive-behavioral therapy impacts that process at the biological level. THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS: LET IT FIND YOU (BUT MAKE THE EFFORT) Discusses the concept of happiness and the common obstacles to achieving happiness. Reviews the methods on how to reduce the obstacles to happiness. WHY ARE MEDITATIVE RELAXATION AND MINDFULNESS IMPORTANT? Discusses the relaxation and different methods. Good introduction before using relaxation and mindfulness audios. THINKING YOUR WAY TO A HEALTHY WEIGHT Examines the thinking that interferes with weight loss. TOO STRESSED TO RELAX? Managing stress improves psychological and physical health. MOBILIZING YOUR BODY'S RESOURCES: HEALING FROM ILLNESS OR INJURY Discusses the natural methods of healing. MY CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIE DIET: OR, HOW TO LOSE WEIGHT WITHOUT DEPRIVATION Using cognitive-behavioral methods to lose weight. WELLNESS: HOW TO REDUCE ILLNESS AND ITS EFFECTS Discusses behavioral ways to manage illness and improve health. POWER OF THE MIND: THE WELLNESS PHILOSOPHY Discusses how the mind can impact health and well-being. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Co-Dependency: An Issue of Control by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Co-dependency refers to an unhealthy relationship in which one person is excessively needy and the other is an overly responsible care-taker." Tweet I still recall with sadness a client I saw many years ago who was extremely co-dependent with her mother. As you may know from reading my articles, cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) may be a very effective treatment, but it is not necessarily easy. For someone with a severe anxiety disorder such as this client had, CBT meant facing her fears (with therapeutic support, of course). However, this person's mother not only supported her financially, but did everything for her and even would engage in her compulsive rituals with her. The client told me directly that she had decided not to continue therapy because it was too hard and her life was pretty comfortable because her mother took care of her. I found this so sad because this woman was so intelligent and interesting with an incredible sense of humor, and yet, she had decided to isolate herself from the world. Although I understand the mother's motivation, the problem is that the co-dependency the mother created was harmful to the client. I understand that the mother did not want to see her daughter suffer. She wanted to protect her daughter from her anxiety so that she wouldn't be in pain. However, paradoxically, as is often typical of co-dependency, the mother was also verbally abusive because at the same time she was resentful of her role as care-taker. As a therapist, I didn't have much to offer this client because my way meant having to deal with her fears and anxiety, whereas her mother's way offered avoidance and peace. However, at some point that peace will be seen as the illusion that it is. What will happen when her mother is unable to take care of her? However, as is true for many people, she chose short-term peace even though it may mean long-term suffering. The main difference between her and others is that she made the choice knowingly. WHAT IS CO-DEPENDENCY? Although as a psychologist, I use the term co-dependency, technically it is NOT a diagnosis. It is a description of a behavior pattern that was popularized by Melody Beattie in her book Codependent No More: How to Stop Controlling Others and Start Caring for Yourself and is commonly understood by the general public. So I have found it helpful as an explanation to my clients of their behavior. Co-dependency refers to an unhealthy relationship in which one person is excessively needy and the other is an overly responsible care-taker. Both of these roles involve control. The needy person controls through the demands that these needs be met. The care-taker controls through the dependency that is created. I often refer to the difference between "true control" and "artificial control." True control is having control over yourself, understanding your emotions and making decisions about your behavior based upon that full comprehension. A person who has true control doesn't react, but acts based upon a personal code of behavior. Their behavioral choices are not about trying to feel in control, but they are in control because of their choices. Whereas, a person who behaves so as to feel in control is engaging in artificial control. The feeling of control is very powerful and people pursue it in various artificial ways. One of the most common, but damaging, ways is controlling another person. Such control is extremely reinforcing, and therefore, likely to be maintained. Co-dependency is one of the ways this occurs. The problem with the common definition of co-dependency is that the definition is so broad that a majority of people could be defined as co-dependent. However, I am using this term for situations in which harm is potentially caused by the co-dependency. For example, an alcoholic's wife makes excuses for him and denies the severity of the drinking which places their children in danger riding in a car with him. Or, a parent protects a child from the consequences of her behavior which prevents her from learning responsibility for her behavior. Such as doing homework for a child may obtain a good grade but creates expectations in the child that her life should be easy and others should take care of her which can seriously affect her success in a work environment later on. Many co-dependent people have the mistaken belief that such a relationship leads to the desire to always stay together and that their partner will never leave because he/she needs them. However, often the opposite is true due to the increased dissatisfaction over time. Although some people may remain in the relationship, it is unlikely they can reach their full potential due to the smothering nature of the relationship. However the co-dependency may manifest, it is important to understand that this type of relationship frequently leads to unhappiness and dissatisfaction for one or both of the individuals in the relationship. Although at first the neediness and care-taking can seem to be attachment or love, overtime these behaviors can become stifling and erode the relationship. In addition, the passive-dependent person is unlikely to grow and become self-reliant and fulfilled. TYPES OF CO-DEPENDENCY "It takes two to tango." You may have heard this statement before which is certainly characteristic of co-dependency. Without at least two people complicit in the co-dependency, it generally can't occur. However, a major exception to this rule exists in the case of a child and parent. Children may not have the option of resisting the control of the parent, and therefore, the parent can create a co-dependent relationship. However, there are methods for children to manage such situations (although they may need assistance). In particular, cognitive methods can be helpful--a parent might be able to control behavior and opportunities, but a parent cannot control thinking. Given that it requires two people to be involved in a co-dependent relationship, there are two types of co-dependency: the care-taker and the dependent. However, it is possible for both people to have aspects of each style and alternate roles in different situations. 1) The Care-taker. The care-taker tends to be overly responsible. S/he may view her/his job as protecting and caring for everyone else. Certainly, to a degree this is necessary in life. We develop relationships for support and assistance. A parent is obligated to care for a child. A husband and wife make a commitment to one another. However, a line exists between helping someone and taking responsibility for someone else's life. The care-taker frequently is acting out of the "noble" desire to prevent suffering in others. However, I placed "noble" in quotes because it is frequently a selfish desire from which the care-taker is acting. For example, a co-dependent parent may believe that if a child is not perfect or if the child suffers it is the parent's fault. Therefore, the parent protects the child from making mistakes and from other painful experiences so that the parent doesn't have to feel guilt. In this instance, much more harm is caused by the child not learning about consequences to his/her behavior. As I tell parents, the consequences of mistakes or painful experiences are usually much less in childhood than in adulthood. Therefore, it is much better for a child to learn to deal with consequences than to learn that lesson as an adult. I recently heard of schools in Great Britain that are banning best friends in elementary school because they want to prevent the children from suffering when friendships break up. This is seriously misguided! Childhood is a time to teach children how to handle emotional such as breaking up with friends. If they don't learn to deal with it in childhood when they have more support, what happens when they become adults and have a serious break-up? Or should they never break up with anyone? I can certainly see some potential problems with that philosphy. Therefore, the care-taker may be concerned and have others' best interests in mind, but he/she is only considering the immediate effects on others and not the long-term effects. Sure, the immediate effect may be a decrease in pain, but the long-term effect is likely to increase pain. 2) The Dependent. The other participant in the co-dependent relationship is the dependent person who desires to be taken care of and may even demand that of others. The dependent person often wields substantial control of the other person through manipulation of the care-taker's over-responsibility for others' emotions. This may not always be a conscious behavior but can occur in ways unknown to the dependent person. However, it is a dynamic frequently found in the co-dependent relationship. The dependent is often comfortable with the status quo, they may not have a desire for a change in the relationship dynamic because the relationship allows avoidance of dealing with the uncomfortable issues of independence and all that might entail. However, at times the dependent may become resentful of the dependency because it usually comes at a cost of freedom of choices in their life. PROBLEMS WITH CO-DEPENDENCY 1) Resentment. Resentment can occur for both people in a co-dependent relationship. The care-taker often feels that he or she is unappreciated. It becomes very time-consuming and tiring always taking care of others. Since the care-taker places the needs of others first, his or her needs may be unmet. Therefore, the care-taker often feels that others don't as much and feel resentful about the lack of reciprocity: "Nobody does anything for me!" The dependent person can become resentful of the ever-increasing dependency because dependency can be giving control over to someone else. They may want to be taken care of, yet at the same time may be angry about not being able to do what they want. For example, a person who doesn't drive and depends on the care-taker may think, "Why isn't she available when I need her? She knows I can't do it myself!" 2) Increased Dependency. Co-dependency creates a cycle of dependency which is likely to lead to more avoidance, demands, and resentment. Instead of the dependent person being helped by the care-taker, he or she is being enabled to stay in the same situation. For instance, the alcoholic can remain alcoholic. They may have to listen to the care-taker's complaints but they can still drink. The more dependent people are enabled, the more they expect to be taken care of, and the more dependent they become. Yet, at the same time they may resent any infringement upon their lives. They may even view their problems as caused by the care-taker. "If he didn't complain all the time, I wouldn't be drinking as much." 3) Avoidance of Problems. Co-dependency creates avoidance of problems rather than resolution of problems. If the motivation is to avoid pain and suffering, that might be achieved in the short-term, but it is not likely to occur for the long-term. For instance, that alcoholic may be able to avoid problems by having another drink, but in the long-term, problems only become worse as they remain unsolved. Or, the anxious person may not have to feel anxious because she is avoiding things that cause anxiety, but she is less and less able to do for herself. WHAT TO DO ABOUT CO-DEPENDENCY? 1) Recognition of Your Style. The first step for changing co-dependency is recognizing what type of co-dependent personality you may have. Do you tend to be overly passive and needy? Or, do you tend to be overly responsible and a care-taker? If you are dependent, you need to take a look at how this may affect your relationships in the long-term and decide whether you want that consequence. Other people are likely to become frustrated and resentful because they may see the relationship as one-sided. It is important for you to be aware of others' needs and to reciprocate with others. It is also necessary for you to develop more independence and to take responsibility for your life rather than expecting someone else to take care of you. Otherwise, in the long-term your dependent style may lead to increased dissatisfaction and even possible loss of the relationship. If you tend to be a care-taker, you need to recognize that you can't be responsible for others' lives. The more you take responsibility, the less capable and the more dependent the other person becomes. The care-taker role actually creates a self-fulfilling prophecy in which you believe others' can't function without you and then you create that dependency. However, in the long-term you are likely to become frustrated and resentful of this role because you don't get your needs met adequately. You need to allow others to take responsibility for themselves even if that might mean some mistakes and short-term suffering. Keep in mind that life requires pain and suffering to grow, improve, and achieve. The infant doesn't learn to walk without falling down. Our mistakes and suffering motivate us to change. Protecting someone from the consequence of life or their choices and the emotions that can guide them only prevents them from having the opportunity to change and to succeed. Yes, it is a painful process to see someone hurting and to not solve the problem when you know you are able to do so. However, you are likely to hurt the other person more in the long-term because s/he is not able to learn how to make choices and manage situations without you. Frequently people will initiate therapy wanting answers. I explain that I cannot tell them what to do. I can only help them understand the different options and the obstacles that interfere with achieving their desired goal. Therapy is often a painful process because not only do I not protect them from the pain but I confront them with their behavior that is problematic. I do this because I know that although denial is a much more pleasant state, it does not lead to resolution of the problems or contentment with life. 2) Set Limits. The care-taker needs to set limits with the dependent person. If the relationship has been long established, this can be difficult because the dependent person knows how to manipulate your emotions (consciously or unconsciously). Therefore, initially, you need to fortify yourself to stick to the limits. When my son was a teen-ager, I used to tell myself when setting limits "The more angry he is with me, probably the better parent I am being." Saying this repeatedly to myself allowed me to set the limits without feeling bad. Of course, I'm referring to reasonable limits, not unreasonable control. In new relationships, it is easier to set the limits right from the beginning. However, in long-term relationships when there is already an established pattern, you may need to gradually establish the limits. For example, if you have been enabling an anxious person by driving him everywhere, you may not be able to stop driving him to places. However, you may start with a limit of not driving him to unnecessary places. So you might drive him to his therapy appointment, but not to the local bar. Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. The following are questions you should be asked at a minimum prior to a diagnosis of depression and treatment. Tweet When Gina told her doctor she was feeling depressed, he gave her a screening test that asked about her symptoms: little interest in doing things, feeling depressed or hopeless, sleep problems, lack of energy, poor appetite or overeating, feelings of failure, problems concentrating, restlessness or slow movements, and thoughts of self-harm. Other than suicidal thoughts, Gina endorsed all of the symptoms and scored high on the test. Her doctor immediately prescribed an anti-depressant. What is wrong with this scenario? 1) No follow-up questions. A screening test doesn't determine whether someone is depressed or not. The purpose of the test is to determine the possibility of depression. If a person scores high on the test, it is crucial for the doctor to ask follow-up questions and to possibly do other medical tests because a person can have all of these symptoms and not have depression. In fact, as discussed below, there are conditions (called rule-out criteria) that exist indicating a different type of problem could be causing the symptoms. These need to be determined prior to diagnosis. 2) Screening tests don't specify type of depression. Even if a person is depressed, such a test doesn't specify the cause or type of depression. Treatment can vary given the cause of the depressive symptoms. Not all depressions are the same and may respond better to different types of treatment. 3) Screening doesn't determine type of treatment. Anti-depressants are one possible treatment for depression but aren't the best treatment in all cases. If she was having suicidal thoughts, medications may be the best option at the time. But other treatments with fewer side effects can be just as effective and if appropriately selected can be more effective than anti-depressants. Doctors should discuss with their patients the different options. 4) No assessment of functioning. A screening test asking about symptoms doesn't assess how much the symptoms affect a person's life. Again, such a determination helps to prescribe the appropriate treatment. Much confusion exists regarding depression because the term is used to mean so many different states of being from severe inability to function to everyday sadness. Yet, to treat depression effectively it is necessary to accurately diagnose the condition. If a person is asked, Are you depressed? the interpretation of the word depressed can influence the response. Using the same words do not always mean the same thing so a diagnosis should be based upon observable facts and information. The following are questions you should be asked at a minimum prior to a diagnosis of depression and treatment. It may seem like a great deal of information is required but without this information a diagnosis may be inaccurate which could lead to inappropriate, ineffective, or even dangerous or unnecessary treatment. What information is necessary to diagnose depression? 1) Medical conditions or surgeries. Have you had a recent physical (including blood tests and other diagnostic tests) and discussed these symptoms with your physician? Do you have any chronic medical conditions including chronic pain? Have you had any recent serious injuries or surgeries? Certain types of medical conditions can mimic depression such as hypothyroidism. Although the criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) requires five out of nine symptoms and persistent depressive disorder (PDD) requires two out of six, many of the symptoms can be associated with lack of energy. For instance, if a person has low energy, they are also likely to be indecisive, lack interest in usual activities, may move more slowly, and may feel hopeless as a result. Therefore, the person meets the requirement for the five symptoms even though a medical condition such as hypothyroidism is causing the lack of energy. Even simple conditions can create such symptoms. I once consulted my doctor because I had most of the symptomsmy husband suggested I do so because he found me sitting on the couch crying because I didn't have the energy to water my plants. Being a psychologist and understanding the diagnostic criteria, I was pretty certain I didn't have depression but I was still concerned depression would be my doctor's quick assessment. However, I should have had more confidence in my selection of physicians. He asked follow-up questions, especially medically-related ones, and determined my symptoms were due to allergies. A few days with an anti-histamine and all my symptoms disappeared. This example also illustrates why you shouldn't have preconceived notions of what your symptoms are because it is possible to lead your doctor in the wrong direction. If I had said I think I have depression rather than I have no energy the outcome might have been different. The same type of symptoms can occur with injuries or surgeries. A surgery can be an assault on the body. So the body's defenses are focused on healing and recovery. When this occurs, the body may have fewer resources available for other activities. This is experienced as fatigue or lack of energy. As stated above, the lack of energy can lead to multiple symptoms and easily be diagnosed as depression. In addition, an injury or surgery can also involve a loss of some type which can lead to a reactive depression as discussed below. However, the criteria for MDD and PDD state that the symptoms cannot be due to a medical condition. So medical conditions need to be considered prior to any diagnosis and treatment of depression. Unless the symptoms interfere with medical treatment or worsen and develop into a clinical depression, you are unlikely to need anti-depressants. If you are referred to a mental health professional for depressive symptoms related to a medical condition or surgery, it doesn't mean that you have clinical depression, but that you may need some education related to understanding what is occurring in your body. It is important to explain to the mental health professional that the symptoms are related to a medical condition or surgery. Usually, if the symptoms are caught early, a patient only needs education as to what to expect and ways to help the body heal. 2) Lifestyle changes. Have you changed exercise habits? Are you on a restricted diet? Any changes to leisure time activities? Sudden lifestyle changes can impact the body and cause depressive-type of symptoms. For instance, someone who exercises intensely stops their routine. The exercise produced endorphins (similar to morphine) that can cause withdrawal effects when no longer present in the same quantities. The same can be true of a healthy change such as when a gambler stops the destructive gambling behavior. Diet can also impact the physical system and cause such symptoms especially restrictive diets that are either low on calories or low on other important nutrients. In my opinion, lifestyle changes are least likely to be part of a mental health assessment. Yet, determining whether any such changes occurred can be critical to an evaluation for depression. For instance, if the change is diet-related, treatment can be as simple as restructuring the diet plan to something more healthy. 3) Use of substances including prescription or over-the-counter medications. What prescription medications do you use? Do you take them as prescribed? Do you drink alcohol? How often and how much? Do you use any over-the-counter medications? How much caffeine do you drink? Any other substances, legal or illegal? Another rule-out criteria for depression is that it can't be due to a substance. When an individual abuses substances whether it is alcohol, prescription drugs such as pain medication, or street drugs an obvious result can be depressive symptoms especially since some of these substances are in the depressives category of drugs. In such cases, however, the symptoms are not considered depression but a reaction to the drugs. Yet, some people may also have clinical depression (and be self-medicating with drugs or alcohol) which can be difficult to determine until the drugs are out of the system. In addition, even legitimately prescribed and appropriately taken medications can have depressive symptoms as a side effect. A pharmacist can help you evaluate your medications to determine if any could be contributing to such symptoms. If so, a discussion with your doctor can ascertain whether alternative treatments without the undesirable side-effects of the medication may be effective for you. 4) Recent events. Have you had any recent distressing events? How much daily stress do you feel? Are you stressed over work, finances, health, or relationships? Just about anyone can have depressive symptoms in reaction to recent events or overwhelming life stress. Unless those symptoms, sometimes referred to as reactive depression, become complicated and shift into MDD, they usually are transient or solvable. For instance, distressing events are usually related to some sort of loss and require a period of grieving. The process of getting support and releasing the emotions can help alleviate the depressive symptoms especially in those without a history of clinical depression. If the issue is stress-related, often a solution to the problem can be found. Symptoms related to stress are usually an indicator of a problem that needs to be addressed. My clinical experience with clients has typically shown that anti-depressants aren't very effective when a person has ongoing stressors. Therapy, however, can help in resolving the issues that are causing the problems. Frequently, the stumbling block is that the solution is not easily seen or may not be desired (e.g. quitting a stressful but high-paying job) but it can alleviate the symptoms. 5) The length and severity of symptoms. When did you first notice the symptoms? Have you felt the symptoms consistently since then? Are there any daily activities you are unable to do? What are they? The essential difference between sadness as a mood state and depression is the length of the symptoms. Sadness as an emotion is a transitory state. You may feel sad temporarily or even more consistently for a day or two. However, MDD requires two weeks of significant symptoms to be diagnosed while PDD requires a chronic state of symptoms for a minimum of two years. Thus, I feel depressed today when it is not a persistent state of being is an expression of an emotion, more accurately expressed as I feel sad today. Sadness is not a treatable condition but is a normal emotional state. Some individuals, however, may not know how to handle normal emotional states and may require therapy to learn methods to manage emotions. But they do not need medication for emotions. In addition, the symptoms cause significant distress or impair daily functioning. The greater the interference in daily activities of living, the more severe the depression is considered. Treatment may require multiple approaches the more severe the depressive symptoms (i.e. therapy, medication, hospitalization). 6) Existential or spiritual depression. Have you been struggling with questions about the meaning or purpose of your life? Do you question your faith? Do you feel you are in a spiritual crisis? A specific type of problem for some (especially creative or analytical types of personalities) that can have associated depressive symptoms are questions about the meaning of life and whether one's life has any purpose. If this question isn't resolved, it can lead to chronic feelings of failure, hopelessness, lack of interest in life and other symptoms of depression similar to PDD. Follow-up questions focused on existential issues are rarely discussed prior to prescribing medications. However, most therapists are trained to ask these questions. Unfortunately, sometimes people are told by well-intentioned others when they have depression that they just need to have faith in God and the depression will go away. They are told stories about others who were helped through faith. Such stories exist because faith can be beneficial but only when the depression is spiritual in nature. Sadly, if a person has depressive symptoms from other causes such as genetics or medical conditions, they are often made to feel worse about themselves because they feel they are being told their suffering is due to a lack of faith or they believe God has abandoned them. Due to such dire consequences, spiritual depression should not be assumed. All forms and causes of depression should be assessed before diagnosing spiritual depression as the cause of the symptoms. An important additional point is a person can have MDD or PDD along with existential or spiritual depression. In such situations psychological and/or medical treatment are required. However, by itself spiritual depression is more of a problem to be resolved and more similar to reactive depression than to MDD or PDD. In those cases, a person may need spiritual counseling or therapy addressing the existential angst. Copyright 2018 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Goal-Setting "By developing a set of specific goals and a plan for reaching those goals, athletes can more effectively use their practice time and even reduce the time required in practice to attain their goals." Training smart is more important than the amount of daily practice. Too often an athlete believes that the more he or she practices, the more proficient he/she will become. However, this plan is not only ineffective, but it can also be detrimental to achieving the desired outcome. An athlete who practices frequently and hard without an overall plan will be more likely to suffer the effects of overtraining such as burn-out, exhaustion, and increased injuries rather than actually improving performance. By developing a set of specific goals and a plan for reaching those goals, athletes can more effectively use their practice time and even reduce the time required in practice to attain their goals. Obviously, this does not mean that the martial artist can achieve rank or win tournaments with little practice; it means that the athlete does not need to waste time through ineffective practice and through the harmful effects of overtraining. Read more... PsychNotes An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Life is Like...Planning a New Vegetable Garden Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? Helping Children Achieve Their Potential How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Do We Really WANT to Educate Our Children? Do You Want an Education or Do You Want a Grade? Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? Why Set Goals If 50% of New Year's Resolutions are Broken by Three Months? What Determines the Success of New Year's Resolutions? Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Listening to Your Heart Helps Moral Decision-Making: But is it Good for Fear Avoidance Decisions? Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Improving Attention and Quality of Effort How Both Overly Positive and Negative Misperceptions of Performance Can Affect You Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Often people state "I'm just lazy" or "I'm unmotivated" when they are unsuccessful. Yet, most of the time, the problem isn't laziness, but lack of understanding about how to achieve goals. For instance, I believe that much of the problem the American people have with weight control is related to inability to set goals. Oh, we can set goals alright! We can set them until the cows come home. But if we don't set goals properly we are unlikely to be successful. For instance, I hear people all the time "I'm going to lose 10 pounds in the next two weeks" or "I'm going to exercise an hour a day" or "I'm going to limit myself to 1200 calories a day" or some combination of these statements in attempts to manage weight. However, even though they might achieve these goals over the short-term, any long-term change is unlikely. They will revert to old habits with resignation sighing, "I'm unmotivated. I'll never be able to lose weight." The same problem can occur in the work setting: "If only I could get organized, I would be more successful at work." Or in sports: "I just don't stick with things. I give up too easily." Again, the problem is likely to be problems with setting goals. We tend to set goals that are unreasonable, perfectionistic, and unachievable. Read more... Without confidence in ones ability, an individual cannot perform to his or her potential. It is even possible that someone with lesser ability, but with confidence, can outperform this person because belief in oneself can be a powerful influence. What is this sense of confidence? Albert Bandura refers to situation-specific self-confidence as self-efficacy which is the strength of an individuals belief that he or she can successfully perform a given activity. The concept of self-efficacy has often been used interchangeably with the concept of self-esteem which is the process of evaluating the self; however, self-efficacy is more accurately described as a precursor to self-esteem and is mediated by the individuals self-attributions. Read more... Assessing performance and correcting errors are important internal skills for the martial arts student to develop. But how does one develop this skill? To do so, the martial arts instructor needs to consciously teach skill just as he or she teaches proper execution of a side kick or using faking techniques during sparring. However, teaching the development of using internal sources of information for feedback may be something many martial arts instructors were not taught themselves. So often when we teach skills, our response to the students performance involves correcting errors or giving general praise, neither of which are conducive to teaching the student how to self-correct errors. In fact, these responses tend to create excessive dependence upon the instructors feedback and presence. Read more... The manner in which instructors provide feedback to athletes can have significant impact upon an athlete's self-efficacy which in turn affects the ability to learn a skill and the overall performance. Self-efficacy is the athlete's personal belief that he or she has the capability to learn and perform a specific skill or activity. The results of an interesting study by Amparo Escarti and Jose Guzman in 1999 indicated that performance feedback which focuses on providing feedback regarding technique rather than evaluating outcome was related to increased self-efficacy, a higher level of performance, and the tendency to choose more difficult tasks. Other research has shown that a higher level of self-efficacy improves performance. Thus, research shows us that how a coach provides feedback to athletes is critical in the development of the athlete. To make this issue all the more complicated, there is research evidence that women respond differently than men to feedback from coaches. This is most likely a crucial point in the martial arts today because the majority of instructors in the martial arts are men and there are more and more women choosing to participate and compete in the martial arts. Therefore, a martial arts instructor needs to be more attuned to the methods of providing feedback to women in order to elicit their best performance as well as to keep them interested in continuing their training. Read more... Some people may be curious as to why this website is dedicated to the "pursuit of excellence" when I am constantly warning about the dangers of perfectionism. To address this question we must differentiate between the pursuit of excellence and the need to be perfect. These concepts are not only different but can be considered antagonistic to one another. In fact these concepts are so opposed to one another that excellence can best be attained by giving up the demands of perfection. Read more... "I have so many great ideas, if only I could get motivated." "I do well with deadlines, but I can't seem to motivate myself." "I can't seem to lose weight unless I have someone constantly checking on me and I can't afford a personal trainer." "I would perform better if I could make myself practice more." Do any of these sound familiar? What the above statements have in common is the individual's need for extrinsic motivation for follow-through, the inability to achieve a desired goal unless someone else provides the impetus to pursue the goal. Without the development of intrinsic motivation, individuals have a great deal of difficulty achieving success in almost any area. If you examine successful people, one of the main differences is their ability to motivate themselves. They are not necessarily more intelligent, or have better ideas, or have better luck; they are just able to pursue a goal to its conclusion. Read more... The vast majority of my clients with anxiety disorders are perfectionists. Additionally, perfectionism is extremely pervasive in our culture generally. However, the typical response when I inquire about perfectionism is, Oh, no, Im not a perfectionist. Im far from perfect. Such a response indicates a lack of understanding regarding the concept of perfectionism. Perfectionism is the belief that one must attain perfection or one is a failure. Perfectionism is an extreme distortion of the concept Do your best when an individual believes that his or her best means, perfect. The individual becomes fearful of making mistakes and may experience stress, anxiety, and depression as a result. Read more... Although we may prefer to believe that learning a motor skill is purely learning a set of physical techniques, we have to consider that most learning typically takes place in the context of an interpersonal relationship with a teacher. The critical question is how does this interaction affect the development of motor skills. It appears that the mediating factor between the presentation of the instructions by the teacher and the performance of the skill by the student may be the cognitive process of self-efficacy (Escarti & Guzman, 1999). Some may argue that the development of effective skills may lead to the increased self-efficacy demonstrated by students of high ability. Although this process occurs, it is not sufficient for explaining the role of developing self-efficacy and its impact on learning motor skills. To fully explain the role of self-efficacy, we must evaluate the interpersonal context of how the teacher or coach provides feedback to the athlete, how that feedback affects self-efficacy, and how self-efficacy enhances performance. Unfortunately, studies directly examining this relationship are sparse, and therefore, the inferences need to be made based on research examining the relation of the different components of the equation such as the feedback/self-efficacy relationship and the self-efficacy/motor skills relationship. READ MORE... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2021 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 29, 2021 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Passive-Aggressive Examples The following are examples from website readers of passive-aggressive encounters they have experienced. The suggested responses are not personal advice as a full evaluation of the situation is not available. Also, the suggestions may not work in every situation but are to give you an idea of possible ways to respond. For more, read: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People and 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People Related articles: Read: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Example 1: Wife's Withholding and Denial Example 2: Boyfriend's Critical Roommate Example 3: Mother-in-law and Communication Problems Example 4: Sibling Won't Help with Elderly Father Example 5: Mother's "Helpful" Criticism Example 6: Wife Deflecting Problems to His Anger Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People I'm sure you've dealt with individuals who have caused you to be so frustrated that afterwards you scratch your head asking "Am I crazy?" Most likely you just had an encounter with a passive-aggressive person. Such encounters may include sarcasm, shifting blame, saying one thing while meaning another to name a few...The problem with these kinds of comments is that if you try to confront them about the insult, you will be accused of not understanding, "I didn't mean it that way" or of misinterpreting, "You must have a problem to think that. I was just trying to compliment you. Sorry I didn't word it right to suit you." As a result, you end up looking like the bad guy, feeling frustrated, and asking yourself, "Am I crazy?" And the other person walks away blameless. Read more... Example 7: Co-Worker's "Joking" Criticism Example 8: Husband's Passive-Aggressive Avoidance Example 9: Volunteer Using Victimization to Control Example 10: Sister's Lack of Support Example 11: Grandmother's Critism of Child Example 12: Disrespectful Attitude from Adult Child Example 13: Sarcastic Ex Example 14: Boyfriend Gets Defensive Example 15: Mother-in-law Wants to Be Center of Attention Example 16: Parents' Criticism of Bride Example 17: Is She Passive-Aggressive or is She an Extrovert? Example 18: Is it Passive-Aggressive or is it Aggressive? Example 19: Confronting a Passive-Aggressive Insult Example 20: Living with Blaming and Guilting Mother (Part 1) Example 21: Living with Blaming and Guilting Mother (Part 2) Example 22: Living with Blaming and Guilting Mother (Part 3) Example 23: Living with Blaming and Guilting Mother (Part 4) Example 24: Child Holding Family Emotionally Hostage Example 25: Got His Way at a Cost Example 26: "I will take care of it just as I ALWAYS do!" Example 27: Insulted by Thank You Notes as a Gift 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People The most difficult social conflict usually involves passive-aggressive (PA) behavior. The reason it is more distressing than even aggressive behavior is because it causes the recipient to be doubtful of him or her self. When someone is aggressive towards you, their intention is clear and it is easier to make a decision such as I need to steer clear of this person or I need to report this behavior. However, the purpose of passive-aggressive behavior is for the aggressor to avoid responsibility for their actions. PA behavior can easily be denied or blame shifted: I didn't mean it the way you took it or You're being too sensitive or You're just trying to get me in trouble. As a result, PA behavior cannot be addressed in the same way you might handle aggressive behavior. When managing PA people you need to be aware of the underlying purpose of the behavior so that you can respond in a way that prevents them from succeeding at their agenda. The less likely they are to achieve their goal, the more likely you will see a reduction in their behavior. Read more... Example 28: Adult Son Deliberately Upsetting Mother Example 29: Handling a Backhanded Compliment Example 30: Trap of Demanding Private Thoughts Example 31: The Passive-Aggressive "Nice" Mother Example 32: Another Passive-Aggressive Mother and Planning a Wedding Example 33: Husband and Wife Mutual Sulking Example 34: Controlling by Refusing to Discuss Problems Example 35: Confronting Step-son About Not Visiting Example 36: Husband's Unreasonable Expectations of ADD Wife Example 37: Back-Stabbing Doctor Example 38: Why Does My Husband Want a "Reward" for Hurting Me? Example 39: Deliberate Annoyances Followed by Denial Example 40: What Do I Do When I am Ignored Most of the Time? Example 41: Problems with Adult Child Living at Home Example 42: Passive Control as a Form of Passive-Aggression Example 43: Getting in the Middle of Passive-Aggression Example 44: Screaming and Calling Names is Aggressive, Not Passive-Aggressive Example 45: Son with Depression Blames Parents Example 46: Caretaker of Passive-aggressive Mother Example 47: The Perfect Backhanded Compliment Example 48: When "I'll Pray for You" is Passive-Aggressive Example 49: Brother Manipulating Mother to Hurt Sister Submit example Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2021 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 29, 2021 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Using Sport Psychology Skills to Improve Martial Arts Training: Developing Focus by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "Top athletes in most sports are turning to sport psychologists to enhance their performance because the development of the mental skills has been shown to give an edge to those athletes." Tweet The following article is part of a series of articles that focus on the practical application of sport psychology skills to martial arts training. For a more in-depth look at the research upon which this article is based, please read: Performance Enhancement in the Martial Arts: A Review Although martial arts derive from the eastern philosophical thinking which focuses on the importance of the combined interaction of the mind and body, many western martial artists tend to ignore the mental aspects of the art and only focus on the physical aspects. Interestingly, other sports that were not so grounded in the metaphysical traditions seem to have more easily accepted the precepts of sport psychology and embraced the development of mental skills. It seems that more and more frequently, whenever a sporting event is on television, references are made to sport psychologists assisting the athletes. Top athletes in most sports are turning to sport psychologists to enhance their performance because the development of the mental skills has been shown to give an edge to those athletes. Developing Focus Through Trial and Error is Inefficient It is true that elite martial artists do develop the necessary mental skills required to be competitive; they achieve these skills mainly through trial and error. However, this is a very inefficient way to develop a skill. For instance, if a person was instructed to throw a sidekick but not instructed in the proper technique, eventually he/she may learn how to throw a sidekick by discovering all the ways that it did not work and refining the technique over time. However, this assumes the individual has the tenacity to continue to practice in the face of repeated failure and is not discouraged by the pummeling from better opponents who did not have to learn by trial and error. You can see how learning a physical skill in this way would be very inefficient and silly. The same is true of mental skills. How many martial artists may have been able to compete at a higher level if only they had been taught the mental skills rather than being expected to somehow just develop the skills? I believe that many people drop out of the martial arts not because they have difficulty with the development of the physical skills but because they dont know how to develop the mental skills. Importance of Using a Method to Develop Focus I frequently hear individuals being told to focus during sparring as if they have the ability to do so automatically. However, not everyone knows how to focus. The injunction to focus ignores the need to practice the skill so the fighter attempts to focus during the sparring match but otherwise does not engage in any mental practice. This would be like expecting someone to become an elite fighter by only practicing techniques during sparring matches but never practicing kicks or punches at any other time. Factors That Interfere With Focus Developing focus is an important but difficult skill. Frequently, fighters are distracted by countless internal and external events. 1) External Interference. External events can include environmental conditions such as the temperature of the room or the size of the ring or it can be the presence and comments of others around them. 2) Internal Interference. Internal events can be the physical condition of the individual such as lack of sleep or it can be a negative internal dialogue or it can be visualizing defeat rather than success. All of these events can be anticipated and a plan can be developed to adequately handle each of them. However, as with physical skills, the plan needs to be practiced until the individual can automatically use the skills when required. Techniques To Improve Focus At this time, I will provide you with a couple of techniques which you can begin to incorporate into your daily practice routine. These techniques will provide the foundation upon which future articles will build. Again, to use a physical analogy, you dont learn a jump-spinning sidekick until you have first learned how to effectively perform a sidekick. 1) Centering The first technique is a centering technique. You will use this technique not only for improving focus but in the future I will describe ways to use it to improve physical skills. So it is important to concentrate on developing the basics of this skill. Step 1. Quiet and Comfortable Environment. When initially practicing centering, find a quiet place where you will not be disturbed. Eventually, you will be able to do the centering even with many distractions around you, but at first it is better to have few distractions. Sit in a comfortable position with your arms and legs relaxed and not crossed so as to allow for good blood flow throughout your body. Step 2. Relax Your Body. Close your eyes and begin to focus on your breathing. As you focus on your breathing, it should naturally begin to slow which will increase the relaxation in your body. Dont try to force yourself to relax. Step 3. Dealing With Distracting Thoughts. If distracting thoughts come into your mind, dont try to get rid of them. The more you try to force relaxation or make demands of yourself to get rid of thoughts, the tenser you will become. The extraneous thoughts will eventually reduce as you become better at focusing. Step 4. Find Your Center. Once you have become more relaxed and your breathing has slowed, begin to focus on finding your center. This can vary from person to person. It can be something visual such as a color or a special place or it can be a sensation such as a peacefulness emanating from within. Step 5. Repeat Daily. Once you find this center, each time you practice this technique you will learn to more quickly access it and to experience it more fully. Practicing centering for even five or ten minutes a day can quickly enhance this skill. You will also benefit from the stress reduction that regular centering produces. 2) Thought Awareness The second technique is thought awareness. So often people engage in negative self-talk but they arent even aware of the automatic negative thoughts that are occurring. Before you can learn to combat these thoughts and to engage in more effective self-talk, you need to be aware of the thoughts. Too often people skip this step. They think that if they just start engaging in positive self-talk, they will be effectively fighting negative thinking. However, there are two major problems with this idea. If you are unaware of your specific self-talk and how it affects you, you may not be using the appropriate refutations of the self-talk. Also, if you are unrealistically positive in your self-talk, you are not going to believe what you tell yourself which will render the self-talk ineffective. Step 1. Journal. A good method to develop thought awareness is to keep a journal. When you engage in competition or even practice, write down your experience. Ask yourself what you were feeling and what were your thoughts related to the feelings. For instance, if you were feeling frustrated, what were you thinking that led to the frustration? Try to allow these thoughts to just flow without censoring them; sometimes this is difficult because we often censor our negative thoughts and feelings so as to protect our egos. However, to learn to challenge these negative thoughts we have to first be aware of them. Step 2. Identify Inaccurate Thoughts. The article "How Do We Change Irrational Thinking" shows you how to examine these thoughts and to challenge them so as to improve mental focus. In the meantime, practice the techniques that I have described. The more you practice, the more you will build the foundation for other skills that will make you a more effective martial artist whether your interest is competitive sparring or katas or whether your interest is for personal achievement. Please feel free to comment or ask questions regarding this article so as to allow me to more fully explain this information in future responses. Copyright 2002 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles PsychNews Index The following are links to national news articles that are based on psychological research. Aging and Lifespan Issues Anger and Conflict Anxiety Childhood Issues Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Depression Emotions Fitness and Health Mental Abilities and Memory Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Physical Health Sleep Disturbance Social Anxiety Social Media and Internet Stress and Coping Trauma and PTSD Weight Control and Body Image Work and Productivity Aging and Lifespan Issues Poor fitness linked to weaker brain fiber, higher dementia risk How people cope with difficult life events fuels development of wisdom, study finds Hour-long naps may boost mental ability for older adults Depression + Health Issues = Problem Drinking in Older Adults Consistently enjoying life could make you live longer Frequent sauna use may reduce dementia risk in men Anger and Conflict What to Do When a Colleague Excludes You Anxiety For Anxiety Disorders, CBT May Restore Brains Structural Balance These techniques can help you cope with your social anxiety at work events Poor sleep in anxiety, depression may make it harder to see positive Study: Combined neurofeedback and HRV training can improve anxiety, depression symptoms Combining opioids with anti-anxiety medicines linked to greater risk of overdose A Tiny Spot In Mouse Brains May Explain How Breathing Calms The Mind ADHD and Anxiety: What's the Connection? NIH: Anxiety Disorders and Treatments OCD Therapy: What You Need to Know Nature Visits Linked to Less Anxiety & Depression Childhood Issues Online parent training helps young kids with ADHD For poor, black teenagers, depression symptoms are different, Rutgers study says The Risk Of Teen Depression And Suicide Is Linked To Smartphone Use, Study Says Encouraging risk-taking in children may reduce the prevalence of childhood anxiety The New Way To Prevent Anxiety in Kids Treating anxiety disorders in children with CBT Studies Question Link Between Mom's Antidepressant Use, Autism in Kids ADHD and Anxiety: What's the Connection? Schools should start later to prevent accidents, depression, scientists say Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Third-Person Self-Talk Can Support Emotional Control Psychotherapy normalizes brain changes linked to social anxiety disorder Depression People with depression use language differently here's how to spot it Hormone Therapy May Aid Menopausal Depression Probiotic use linked to improved symptoms of depression Orange light as a potential mental health treatment For poor, black teenagers, depression symptoms are different, Rutgers study says Antidepressants May Not Work for Those with Depression Plus Chronic Illness Depression treatment needs overhaul Smartphone apps reduce depression Depression in heart attack survivors is common, often untreated A New, More Rigorous Study Confirms: The More You Use Facebook, the Worse You Feel Poor sleep in anxiety, depression may make it harder to see positive UVA researchers use probiotic bacteria in yogurt to reverse depression symptoms Hold That Pose: Yoga May Ease Tough Depression Study: Combined neurofeedback and HRV training can improve anxiety, depression symptoms Two Studies Explore How Video Games Can Treat Depression Depression + Health Issues = Problem Drinking in Older Adults Nature Visits Linked to Less Anxiety & Depression Depression Can Stalk Families Through Generations Alcohol and rapid antidepressants have same effects on the brain New Clues to Depression Spotted in the Genome Emotions Suicide often leaves mental, physical woes in surviving spouse Fitness and Health Study shows benefits of exercise can outweigh health effects of severe obesity: Fat but Fit? You can't judge a person's fitness by weight alone Poor fitness linked to weaker brain fiber, higher dementia risk Unmotivated to exercise? Dopamine could be to blame Happiness and Well-being True happiness isn't about being happy all the time How much people earn is associated with how they experience happiness Mental Abilities and Memory Hour-long naps may boost mental ability for older adults How Sleeping Memories Come Back to Life Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods A Tiny Spot In Mouse Brains May Explain How Breathing Calms The Mind How Meditation Helps You Handle Stress Better Parenting Online parent training helps young kids with ADHD Performance, Success and Goal Attainment You can take a break from practicebut not for too long, study shows Physical Health Depression in heart attack survivors is common, often untreated Policies and Issues in Mental Health Stigma of Mental Illness Linked to Mix of Beliefs About Causes Oversimplifying beliefs about causes of mental illness may hinder social acceptance Sleep Disturbance New insights into why sleep is good for our memory Poor sleep in anxiety, depression may make it harder to see positive Hour-long naps may boost mental ability for older adults The Truth About People Who Brag They Dont Need Much Sleep Social Anxiety 'I'm Not Rude, I Have Social Anxiety.' These techniques can help you cope with your social anxiety at work events Psychotherapy normalizes brain changes linked to social anxiety disorder Social Media and the Internet What can Facebook learn about you from just one click? (Psychological targeting) Smartphone apps reduce depression A New, More Rigorous Study Confirms: The More You Use Facebook, the Worse You Feel Stress and Coping How Meditation Helps You Handle Stress Better Trauma and PTSD Estrogen Levels Influence Susceptibility to PTSD Role of gut microbiome in posttraumatic stress disorder: More than a gut feeling Estrogen Levels Influence Susceptibility to PTSD Electrical forehead patch could treat chronic PTSD Sleep may help reduce PTSD symptoms Weight Control and Body Image Study shows benefits of exercise can outweigh health effects of severe obesity: Fat but Fit? You can't judge a person's fitness by weight alone Work and Productivity What to Do When a Colleague Excludes You Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles How to Manage Panic and Anxiety If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download How to Manage Panic and Anxiety by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "...even panic is normal. Most of us will experience a spontaneous panic attack some time in our life...Because a panic attack feels awful many people assume that it is dangerous..." Tweet What If I Have a Heart Attack? George suddenly experienced excruciating chest pain one day at work. Never having experienced such symptoms before, he was rushed to the hospital. After testing to evaluate for a heart attack, the doctor concluded that his heart was fine and that he had an anxiety attack. When asked about stressors, George reported that he was under some deadlines at work and that some family problems were weighing on his mind. Although he understood that he didn't have a heart attack, he became worried that the doctor may not have been thorough enough and that maybe he would still have a heart attack. He became obsessed about any minor pain that occurred in his chest which exacerbated his anxiety and stress. As a result, he continued to have panic attacks. What If I Lose Control? Francine had similar symptoms while she was driving. After she visited her doctor, she understood that she had experienced a panic attack. However, she became concerned about having another panic attack. "What if I have a panic attack and lose control of the car while driving?" Predictably, she began to experience increased anxiety especially related to driving and started to have panic attacks whenever she got in her car. She began to avoid driving completely and was diagnosed with agoraphobia. What If I Feel This Again? Sandy was overwhelmed with her initial symptoms of dizziness, lightheadedness, and visual disturbance. She was diagnosed with anxiety and although she knew she wasn't in any danger physically, she was fearful of having the symptoms. "I can't stand to feel that way! It's awful and I can't focus on my work." Again, the worry about feeling anxious created more anxiety leading to more attacks. Eventually, she was diagnosed with panic disorder. What Is A Panic or Anxiety Attack? A panic attack is a sudden onslaught of symptoms in which a person feels overwhelmed and out-of-control. The symptoms vary for each individual. However, common symptoms include rapid breathing, chest pain, dizziness, trembling, muscle tension, and stomach upset. These symptoms are often accompanied by fear of harm such as having a heart attack, fear of losing control, fear of experiencing symptoms and feeling bad, fear of going crazy, or fear of what people might think. People often wonder what is the difference between an anxiety attack or panic attack. Often these terms are used interchangeably. However, some people will refer to a panic attck when their symptoms are more intense and out-of-control. Anxiety usually refers to symptoms that don't reach the level of an "attack." Why Does Panic and Anxiety Occur? Anxiety is a normal process of the body that people experience for a variety of reasons. Most commonly, if we are in danger our body needs to prepare to deal with whatever may be threatening us. For instance, as you are driving on the highway, the car in front of you spins out of control. For you to handle the threat, your body needs to react quickly. To do this, your brain tells certain systems of your body to be activated and other systems to shut down. 1) AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM ACTIVATION This activation of the autonomic nervous system causes andrenalin to be released which speeds up your reaction time. This also causes the symptoms of rapid breathing, feelings of agitation, and restlessness. 2) PREPARATION TO REACT In addition, your muscles tense to prepare you to react quickly. This creates the pain many people experience especially in their neck, shoulders and chest. 3) SYSTEM SHUTDOWN Your body will shut down unnecessary systems to prepare to react. You really don't need to be digesting your last meal while you're trying to avoid an accident. However, because the digestive system is shut down people may experience gastrointestinal symptoms such as stomach upset, diarrhea, or constipation. 4) FOCUS ON THREAT Also, the brain needs to focus on the immediate danger in front of you so it shuts down the peripheral vision which causes the tunnel vision many people experience. is a normal process. In fact, even panic is normal. Most of us will experience a spontaneous panic attack some time in our life. These panic attacks may be due to stress or some physical condition such as sleep deprivation, hormonal imbalance, or asthma. Most people don't worry about the panic attack itself. They focus on dealing with the condition signaled by the panic attack. However, some people become worried about the panic attack itself, start focusing on it, and as a result, create additional panic attacks. This is similar to a computer program getting stuck in a feedback loop: A causes B causes C which causes A again (which causes B and so on). In other words, the initial symptoms of the panic causes the person to worry. The worry is then perceived as a threat which, as I indicated earlier, can cause a panic attack. Therefore, the person becomes stuck in this cycle. When that occurs it is known as Panic Disorder. Is Panic Dangerous? Because a panic attack feels awful many people assume that it is dangerous or could create a dangerous situation. I will discuss the most common concerns that people have related to panic attacks. 1) FEAR OF HEART ATTACK Symptoms of panic include many symptoms that occur when people have heart attacks such as chest pain, rapid breathing or shortness of breath, nausea, dizziness, cold sweat. Therefore, many people assume they are experiencing a heart attack. If it is the first panic attack, it is critical that the person be examined by a doctor to determine the diagnosis. However, if the doctor indicates that the person does not have heart disease, then the individual can safely assume that they are experiencing a panic attack. However, some people still worry that the panic attack could cause a heart attack. This is not possible (except in the movies). The reason for this is that anxiety and panic is a normal process of the body as I said earlier. It is the arousal of the autonomic nervous system also know as the "flight or fight response." This system is a beneficial part of the body meant to help us. It is activated if we are threatened and need to react quickly such as by running or fighting back. Therefore, it cannot harm us. That would be like saying that the normal process of breathing which is meant to help us could actually harm us. It can't. And neither can the arousal of the autonomic nervous system. Now, there is some evidence that long-term (over years) arousal of the autonomic nervous system can contribute to heart disease. However, this is through a different process. What occurs is that during this arousal, the stress hormone cortisol is released. Cortisol is meant to help us cope with stress. But under the condition of chronic stress where too much is in our system over time, it will lead to the build up of fat around the middle of our body. As you may know, this particular fat has been indicated to be a risk factor with heart disease. Again, however, if you do not have heart disease, a panic attack cannot trigger a heart attack. 2) FEAR OF GOING CRAZY Another fear that people have is that a panic attack will cause them to go crazy. Certainly, panic is very disorienting and it may be hard to focus and concentrate so it may feel as if you are losing your mind. However, that can't happen. And again, the reason is because panic is a normal system of the body. Anything normal cannot cause a person to lose their mind. The only time that a person can "lose their mind" with panic is if they already have a mental condition that causes them to lose touch with reality. Even then, it can only be a trigger for an underlying condition. For example, if a person has schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. However, there would be other signs of these conditions. Therefore, if you have seen a physician or psychologist and you have not been diagnosed with these types of mental conditions, panic cannot cause you to go crazy. 3) FEAR OF LOSING CONTROL Many people who have recurring panic fear that it will cause them to lose control. For example, they fear that if they are driving they will suddenly lose control and not be able to drive. Then, they become fearful that the panic will cause them to have an accident. This is certainly not true and for a very interesting reason. Remember, earlier I said that panic is to help us prepare to handle a threat. Therefore, while our autonomic nervous system is aroused we are in a heightened state of preparation and are more ready to react quickly to a problem. We are able to think and respond. In my 20 years treating panic and anxiety and doing driving exposures with clients, I have never once seen or heard of any of them unable to at least pull the car over to the side of the road. No one has ever just taken their hands off the steering wheel and had an accident. I am not concerned about riding in a car with someone who is having a panic attack because I don't believe I am in danger (unless they are just a bad driver, in general). 4) FEAR OF FAINTING Another fear that people experience due to the symptoms of lightheadedness and dizziness is that they will faint and the fainting will cause a dangerous situations. However, this does not occur because panic causes an increase in blood pressure (one of those symptoms to help us prepare for threat) but fainting is most typically caused by low blood pressure. However, one caveat to this is that if a person already has a fainting condition, a panic attack may trigger a faint. Even in this case it is not typical due to the rise in blood pressure. However, again, if a physician has given you a clean bill of health and you have never fainted previously due to another condition, a panic attack will not cause you to faint. Medical Conditions That Mimic or Involve Anxiety Due to the non-specific nature of panic symptoms, it is important to obtain a complete physical and an accurate diagnosis from a physician prior to assuming that the experience was a panic attack. Many other conditions may have similar symptoms making it necessary to rule-out these other conditions prior to treating for panic. Some of the common conditions include heart disease, high blood pressure, asthma, hyperthyroidism, hormonal imbalance, and sleep apnea. However, other conditions that I have seen which created or triggered anxiety/panic include Meniere's disease, hiatal hernia, GERD, diabetes, and even the common cold. Also, certain medications or the use of drugs or alcohol can cause panic. A common cold medication that has pseudoephidrine in it can trigger anxiety in susceptible individuals. Overuse of products with caffeine can stimulate anxiety. For instance, most people can develop heart palpitations with 1000mg of caffeine or the equivalent of about six cups of regular coffee. In addition, a person may have both an anxiety disorder and a medical condition. In that case, the medical condition may exacerbate or trigger the panic. Therefore, a person may require treatment for both. However, it is important to note that once medical conditions have been ruled-out and/or treated by a physician, it can be assumed that the individual can be safely treated for an anxiety condition. What Is Panic Disorder? What Is Agoraphobia? Panic Disorder is when an individual has recurring panic attacks and has developed a dread of having additional attacks. Panic disorder has often been referred to as "the fear of fear" but more accurately it is the fear of having the symptoms that occur with anxiety/panic. If the individual begins to avoid situations due to the possibility of having a panic attack they may be diagnosed with agoraphobia as well. This avoidance may cause the individual to have serious limitations in their life including not being able to work, not being able to drive, and sometimes, not being able to leave their home. Managing Panic/Anxiety 1) MEDICATION Since most people see their physician first for panic and anxiety, most people are treated with medication. Although medication can be effective and requires little effort, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is just as effective, has a lower drop-out rate due to the lack of side-effects, and has a lower relapse rate (Mitte, 2005; Olatunji et al, 2008; Smits et al, 2008). In other words, people who take medication may need to stay on medication to manage the symptoms whereas CBT teaches skills that, once learned, do not need the ongoing intervention of the therapist to continue the benefit. 2) EDUCATION The first thing that people with anxiety and panic need is proper education about panic attacks and their mechanism. They need to understand as described above that panic and anxiety cannot harm them. This is the first step of the cognitive therapy which involves changing how people think. 3) ANXIETY REDUCTION SKILLS People with anxiety and panic need to learn that they have methods available that help them to reduce and control the symptoms they experience. Various methods include slow breathing, muscle relaxation, meditative relaxation, mindfulness practice, and Qi Gong and other movement types of relaxaton such as yoga (read: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindulness Important?). These methods take practice when the person is not feeling anxious otherwise they may not be very effective. For instance, if someone tries to deep breathe during a panic attack and they have never practiced the breathing at any other time, it is not likely to work. 4) CHALLENGE THE IRRATIONAL FEARS Using the education about panic, the individual needs to challege the irrational beliefs they have about the panic symptoms. For example, if they fear the panic is a heart attack, they need to remind themselves that they have been examined by a physician who has determined that this experience is anxiety. And they may need to repeat this as often as necessary until they believe it. Cognitive restructuring requires repetition to be effective (read: How Do We Change Irrational Thinking?). Eventually, to control anxiety the individual needs to develop the belief, "So what if I panic? It's just unpleasant. It can't hurt me." When I have clients that get to the point where they tell the anxiety "Bring it on! You don't scare me" I know we're at the end of therapy. Because once somebody truly feels that way, we typically see a reduction in the intensity and frequency of the panic/anxiety symptoms typically to a normal level. Since it is normal to have anxiety or an occasional panic, I would not expect to completely eliminate the symptoms. Panic Assistance Audio To create the above belief, an individual needs to develop a tolerance for the anxiety symptoms. I see treatment for panic as two-fold: developing tolerance for the symptoms and developing self-confidence in the ability to reduce the symptoms. To help clients learn how to develop tolerance I created a Panic Assistance Audio (download free) that coaches an individual through the panic while challenging the irrational fears of the panic. This audio can be used whenever you feel high anxiety or panicky. However, this audio is particularly designed to assist people when they are doing exposures (see below) to the anxiety situations. 5) INTEROCEPTIVE DECONDITIONING Interoceptive deconditioning is a fancy (and almost scary) psychological term referring to a method to reduce the fear to the anxiety symptoms. Although I will describe this method, it is important to do this only with therapeutic support because if it is not done correctly it can have the opposite effect intended and actually increase intensity or frequency of panic. This method involves artificially creating the physical symptoms of anxiety. This can be done for some people just by thinking about having a panic attack. For others, it can be created by deliberately hyperventilating, spinning around in circles, or cardio exercise. Typically this method involves a gradual desensitization. For instance, we start with creating a low level of anxiety and as the person develops tolerance as well as the anxiety management skills we increase the anxiety level until they are able to tolerate the panic level. This method of treatment is conducted under very controlled circumstances and from my experience due to the training process people are ready when it is time to confront the panic because they have already learned tolerance of the symptoms and have confidence in their ability to manage the symptoms. We never move to the next level of anxiety until they are ready to do so. 6) EXPOSURES Exposure therapy involves confronting the situations that trigger the panic. In fact, interoceptive deconditioning just described is a type of exposure therapy. Other exposure therapy is utilized when a person may be avoiding situations due to fear of having a panic attack such as people who have agoraphobia. For example, someone may be avoiding driving. Exposure therapy to driving would be to gradually introduce the person to the feared situation while having them use the previously learned tools to manage the anxiety and challenge the thinking. Depending on the level of fear sometimes this involves the therapist assisting the individual. Which is why I have been with many clients when they are having a panic attack while driving. The therapist may need to coach the person while they face their fear. However, as soon as practical, it is important that the therapeutic support is withdrawn so the individual can rely on him or herself. References Mitte, K. (2005). Meta-analysis of cognitive-behavioral treatments for generalized anxiety disorder: a comparison with pharmacotherapy. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 785-795. Olatunji, B., Cisler, J.M., and Deacon, B.J. (2008). Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders: a review of meta-analytic findings. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33, 557-577. Smits, J.A., Berry, A.C., Tart, C.D., and Powers, M.B. (2008). The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral interventions for reducing anxiety sensitivity: a meta-analytic review. Behavioral Research and Therapy, 46, 1047-1054. Copyright 2011 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Read Books, Not Minds by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The main problem with this type of thinking is that we are making assumptions that are often inaccurate." Tweet Expecting Others to Read Your Mind Frequently people become upset because they have an expectation of someone and that person did not fulfill the expectation. However, they did not voice the expectation, and instead, became angry that the person didn't do what they wanted. This can be as simple as expecting another driver to know that he/she should let you merge (when you don't signal). "She could see the construction and my lane ending. Should have known that I needed to get over and slowed down." Or, as occurs often, it could be expecting a certain response from a spouse, "He could see that I was upset. He should of canceled his meeting and talked to me." As you may realize, this type of thinking is closely related to the "should" thinking which is an expectation or demand. The main difference is that the mind-reading expectation is a specific demand that the other person should know what you're thinking or what you expect without having to tell him or her. The main problem with this type of thinking is that we are making assumptions that are often inaccurate. We assume that the other person thinks exactly like us or that they should think the way we do, and therefore, arrive at the same conclusion. And why should that be true? We all grow up with different experiences, different families, different communities, different cultures. As a result, we are more likely to take differently than we are likely to think the same. For instance, one person may grow up in a family where they get quiet time if they're upset whereas another person's family gives comfort and reassurance when distressed. How could two people from these two families know what each other needs if those needs are not communicated? Therefore, this type of thinking leads to not getting what you want when you could have if only your needs had been communicated. The individual may interpret the lack of responsiveness as rejection or even a deliberate attempt to hurt when nothing of the sort was intended. For instance, such misunderstandings can be seen with flirting. Why do people flirt? Because they want to communicate interest while reducing the risk of rejection by not being too obvious. This may be fine on the dating scene where it is expected behavior (although even then much miscommunication occurs). However, flirting behavior can become especially problematic when a person in a relationship expects their partner to pick up on these nonverbal cues when the setting isn't providing any clues. For example, a woman trying to be romantic when her husband is watching football. Believing That You Can Read Others' Minds I used to believe "I'm a woman--I'm intuitive. I'm a psychologist--I'm trained. I've been with my husband many years--I know what he's thinking." However, I've been proved wrong so many times I finally gave up. We really can't know what someone else is thinking unless they tell us. Frequently, mind-reading others occurs when a person is trying to interpret someone's non-verbal cues. For example, "She kept looking away, she must have thought I was boring." The problem with this thinking is that there may be other interpretations of the same behavior. In this example, perhaps she was watching for someone she was expecting, or maybe she had something in her eye, or maybe she was shy, or... I could continue, but you understand my point. In fact, a good way to challenge this type of thinking is to see if you can create even one believable alternative explanation for the behavior. If you can, you are possibly wrong. A client and I once filled up a large marker board brain-storming why someone may have treated him a certain way. Afterwards, he was able to recognize that the person may not have been trying to hurt him. Challenging Mind-Reading 1) Recognition of Assumptions. The first step to challenging mind-reading is to recognize that you are making an assumption. This may even include when you've told someone something previously. You are still making an assumption: that he or she still remembers. "I told her I was a vegetarian and yet she invited me to Thanksgiving dinner and tried to serve me turkey." 2) Determine Alternative Explanations. The next step is to determine other possible assumptions or explanations could be accurate. As I indicated previously, brain-storm by yourself or with someone to develop other explanations. In addition, if available, consider the other person's explanation of his or her behavior. Too often people will dismiss the other person's explanation in favor of their own mind-reading: "He said he was just tired, but I know he was mad at me." 3) Repetition. Finally, remind yourself that you are mind-reading and could be wrong. The only way you can know with certainty is through direct communication. Therefore, keep repeating this understanding to yourself until you believe it. 4) Cognitive Diary. It is often useful to write down the situations in which you are mind-reading. This helps you to more clearly think through the process and challenge the thinking. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "...instill hope by providing you with the knowledge that you have the resources within you to control the damaging effects of stress." Tweet Almost six decades ago, Hans Selye first described his comprehensive theory of the General Adaptation Syndrome (GAS) based on research from the prior two decades showing the effect of stress on disease (Selye, 1955). Stress is such a ubiquitous term these days that most people think they know what it means. However, the common meaning may lead to a misunderstanding of the stress reaction. The term stress has unfortunately become commonly associated with just psychological stress and many people don't realize that Selye's work was primarily based upon physical stress or what he called noxious agents. He showed that our bodies react fairly consistently to stress (both physical and psychological) in three progressive stages as described by his GAS theory (Selye, 1974): 1) Alarm reaction. The initial stage of stress occurs when the individual is surprised by a new stress event (stressor). During this stage the body reacts by preparing itself to confront the stressor. The symptoms experienced can include increased heart rate, breathing and blood pressure, muscle tension, gastrointestinal distress (stomach upset), and visual changes as well as other physical reactions. 2) Resistance. During the resistance stage of stress, the individual focuses on coping with the stressor. The exact nature of coping can vary from person to person. However, if the coping is effective, the body returns to its normal state. If the coping is ineffective, or if the stressor continues beyond the person's ability to cope, the individual may experience the final stage of exhaustion. 3) Exhaustion. The exhaustion stage is when the body depletes all of its energy reserves and the body can no longer resist the effects of stress. During this stage the individual is likely to experience more severe symptoms including physical or psychological illness. Background Concepts to Understand 1) Stressor. A stressor is any event that is perceived as a threat to the body. Therefore, a stressor can be daily hassles or it can be a major trauma or tragedy. An occasional daily hassle such as unexpected car repair may not stress the system as much as the loss of a job. However, numerous daily hassles over a prolonged period of time can potentially trigger a stress reaction (DeLongis, 1982). Even if a stressor is not a physical threat, it can still be thought of as an assault to the body. For instance, many people are surprised at the aftermath of surgery. After their surgeon has told them that they are healed, they wonder why they are still feeling fatigued, lethargic, even depressed. It is because their body has been assaulted by the surgery and it takes time to recover not just physically but from the exhaustion stage of the GAS. If there is other ongoing stress, the body may not have much opportunity to recover because it is continuing to react to the stressors. Stressors can be psychological threats as well. If your boss places you on probationary status due to dissatisfaction with your work, you are likely to experience a psychological threat. This threat creates a stress reaction which may even have the effect of making it more difficult to address the work problems. However, psychological threats can be reduced by changing the perception of threat as discussed later in this article. 2) Optimal level. Biological and psychological sciences have shown that in many instances an optimal level of brain chemistry exists. It is necessary to understand this concept to fully comprehend how the chemicals in your system interact in response to stress. Optimal level refers to the concept that too much or too little is likely to lead to deterioration or impairment. In other words, there is a balance that is necessary to maintain. Therefore, we can't say that a particular chemical in the body is good or bad because the true story involves maintaining the appropriate balance of the chemical for optimal or best functioning. 3) Homeostasis. The internal process of balancing the body's chemistry is referred to as homeostasis. Think of it as similar to a thermostat to maintain a temperature of 72 degrees in a building. When the temperature measures below 72 degrees the air conditioning is activated and when it is above 72 the furnace is activated. Thus, the temperature is maintained in a balanced or homeostatic state. Many systems in the body also function in this way so the body tries to maintain a state of homeostasis. 4) Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis disruption. The primary structures of the brain that are involved in the stress response are the hypothalamus, the pituitary, and the adrenal gland. The adrenal gland may be somewhat familiar to many people because it is the source of adrenaline. The HPA axis is activated during the stress response through a complex interaction and release of various hormones and chemicals in the body. The purpose of the activation of the HPA axis is to maintain the body's homeostasis. A disruption to this process results in the experience of the physical and psychological symptoms of stress. What Happens Biologically to the Body During the GAS Stages? 1) Biology of the alarm reaction. When an individual encounters a stressful event, the body reacts by preparing to confront what it perceives as a physical threat. This preparation involves enhancing systems of the body that help in reacting to the stress and reducing focus on unnecessary systems of the body. For instance, systems that supply energy are important for coping with the stressor whereas systems that consume energy but are not needed immediately, such as digestion, are curtailed. The glucose (sugar) in the bloodstream is used to provide the necessary energy to confront the threat. Endorphins, which are natural pain-relievers similar to morphine, are released to prepare for potential injury to the body. The release of these chemicals is triggered by a complex message process initiated by the hypothalamus sent through the pituitary to the adrenal gland. Message Process sent Chemically to Maintain Homeostasis:* Hypothalamus: Hey, we're under attack! Something needs to be done! Also, releases endorphins. Pituitary: Okay, I'll let the adrenal gland know. And I'll release some endorphins, too. Adrenal Gland: Got it! Releasing epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine. Hypothalamus: Great! That's enough. I'll let you know if we need more. Pituitary: Stop the release for now. Adrenal Gland: Okay. 2) Biology of resistance. During the stage of resistance, the primary focus is using the energy reserves to confront the stressful event because the glucose has been depleted. As short as a few hours, the energy stores (glucose created from glycogen) may also be depleted but the body still demands energy to confront the threat. In the body's search for additional energy, it stimulates the release of cortisol. The release of cortisol (often referred to as the stress hormone) is initiated by the hypothalamus sent through the pituitary causing the release of cortisol through the adrenal gland. Under normal conditions, the rise in cortisol sends a message back to the hypothalamus. Message Process sent Chemically to Resist Stress:* Hypothalamus: We're still under attack! We need more energy! Pituitary: Okay, I'll let the adrenal gland know. I'll release more endorphins. Adrenal Gland: Got it! Releasing cortisol now. Also, releases epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine. Hypothalamus: Great! That's enough. I'll let you know if we need more. Pituitary: Stop the release of cortisol for now. Adrenal Gland: Okay. The release of cortisol causes several reactions. Most importantly, it stimulates a process to create more energy. In addition, cortisol is an anti-inflammatory. Many people are familiar with the synthetic corticosteroids which are strong anti-inflammatory (steroidal) drugs prescribed for joint pain, skin conditions, allergies, asthma and many other medical problems. Think of cortisol as a natural anti-inflammatory steroid produced by the body to aid in healing (Sears, 2011). 3) Biology of exhaustion. Eventually, however, the body uses all its alternative sources of energy. The exhaustion phase of the GAS refers to the body having exhausted all of its sources of energy. However, if the stress event is not resolved, the body may need to reduce its maintenance of the various systems of the body to conserve energy. This is why one of the primary effects of prolonged stress is extreme fatigue. However, the body keeps requesting other energy sources. Unfortunately, just as steroid prescription medication (cortisone) can cause serious side effects if used too frequently for too long or in high doses, natural cortisol can also create problems if too much is released over a long period of time. In this case, a disruption to the homeostatic process occurs. Message Process When Homeostasis is Disrupted: Hypothalamus: Can't stop! We are still under attack! Pituitary: I'll let the adrenal gland know. Adrenal Gland: Releasing more cortisol. But I got to warn you that this can cause other problems. Hypothalamus: I don't care! We need to deal with the most immediate threat. Then we will deal with the others. Pituitary: Release more cortisol. Adrenal Gland: Releasing. I still don't think it is a good idea. *Please forgive the artistic license. Obviously, this is a very over-simplified explanation of a complex process. The HPA axis can be disrupted whether too much cortisol or too little cortisol is released (Smith and Vale, 2006). Unfortunately, this can lead to a chronic cycle that can have devastating effects on the body including psychological illness (anxiety, depression, sleep disturbances/fatigue, addiction), metabolic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease/high blood pressure, and auto-immune diseases. For a full description of this process, see Seeward (2006). What is the Effect of this Process in the Short-Term and in the Long-Term? In the short-term, the process initiated by the HPA axis is a positive one. It prepares the body to respond to a threat. To do this, it needs to activate certain systems of the body and it needs to curtail unnecessary systems so that most of the body's energy is focused on responding to the stressful event. The primary ways that it affects the body systems are as follows (Bowirrat et al., 2010; Buckingham, 2007; Saladin, 2011): 1) The body's defense system. As explained above, the body has a natural anti-inflammatory response to threat. The purpose of this response is to prepare the body for possible physical injury. The body's fight or flight response to a threat is the same whether the threat is physical or psychological. Therefore, the body prepares for injury by releasing anti-inflammatory agents that fight pain, swelling, soreness, redness, and inability to function. However, prolonged stress and release of the cortisol can have damaging effects on the immune system. In particular, the immune system can become suppressed which leads to less ability to fight off infections. Years of stress without treatment can lead to the development of auto-immune diseases such as lupus, fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis, thyroid dysfunction, skin disorders, and multiple sclerosis among many others (NIH, 2012). 2) The metabolic system. The initial response to a stress event is to draw on the body's stored energy. The body requires energy to respond to the threat by either fighting or running away both of which require a great deal of energy. Again, remember the body doesn't distinguish between a physical threat and a psychological one (unless you teach itwhich we will discuss later). Initially, the body uses glycogen which are the sugar (carbohydrate) stores. However, as soon as a few hours these stores may be depleted. This is the reason why some diabetics will have instability of blood sugars under stress. Under long-term stress this system can become deregulated and lead to metabolic disorders such as Type II diabetes and obesity which can contribute to a host of other problems. 3) The musculoskeletal system. If the stress event continues once the available glucose and glycogen are depleted, the body turns to protein synthesis for additional energy. Initially, this increases energy and helps the body to respond to the threat. However, normally this process of protein synthesis which occurs in the bone cells is meant to help with the building of muscle, not for prolonged response to stress. As a result, if the energy from protein synthesis is diverted over time to reacting to stress, it can have long-term consequences to the muscles and bone including osteoporosis as well as damage to the muscles and connective tissue (cartilage and tendons). 4) The central nervous system (CNS). The initial release of the stress hormones has the effect of increasing the ability of the brain to function. Memory is enhanced and the ability to make quick decisions is increased. Again, this is for the purpose of preparing the body to react to the threat. However, over time the prolonged release of the chemicals during the stress reaction and the depletion of the energy stores can have a devastating effect on the central nervous system. One of the primary symptoms that individuals complain about in the exhaustion stage of the GAS is the over-whelming fatigue. This symptom makes a great deal of sense when you understand that the body has depleted its energy stores and that it takes time to replenish those stores. However, some of the other symptoms experienced may interfere with the replenishment of those stores. For instance, the extreme fatigue may affect appetite so that someone is not ingesting enough calories to restore their energy. Other effects of long-term stress to the CNS can be mood changes (depression and/or anxiety), impaired memory, confusion, and problems making decisions. Years of long-term impact to the CNS can even contribute to the development of brain disorders such as dementias (i.e. Alzheimers among others) and movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease. 5) The cardiovascular system. When the body first responds to threat, it increases the retention of salt and water. Again, this is in preparation for a physical threat in which the body may have to respond with intense physical activity. The retention of salt and water is to prepare for the potential loss of fluids through sweating or bleeding. However, the impact of salt and water retention can lead to increased salt craving and ingestion of more fluids. Prolonged retention of salt and water at high levels can lead to increased blood pressure and contribute to heart disease. 6) The reproductive system. So as to manage the limited amount of energy available when confronting a stressful event, the body reduces the functioning of unnecessary systems. One of these systems is the reproductive system. Energy does not need to be expended on sexual activity or the production of the sex hormones while the body is under immediate threat. Therefore, the libido decreases and even the cessation of the menstrual cycle may occur so that the energy involved in these processes can be diverted to the threat. However, prolonged threat can lead to a suppression of the sex hormones over a period of time. When this occurs, sexual dysfunction such as impotence and even infertility can result. 7) The gastrointestinal system. Another system that is considered unnecessary is the digestive system. In particular, the production of bicarbonate and mucus which protects the lining of the stomach is reduced to conserve the body's energy. The immediate impact is the experience of stomach upset when confronted with a stressor. However, the long-term impact of reducing the production of these contributors to the digestive process is much more serious. In particular, the individual may experience increased susceptibility to stomach problems such as ulcers, colitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and irritable bowel syndrome. 8) Systemic deterioration. Perhaps, however, the most serious consequence of a prolonged stress reaction is the disruption to all these systems leading to failure of the body to respond adequately to future stress. Even if the individual is no longer experiencing a direct threat, the body perceives the impact to all these systems as a threat. In other words, the reaction to stress itself becomes a stressor that triggers the GAS. Even if no further external stress is impacting the individual, without some sort of intervention to re-balance the system, the body continues in this cycle with ongoing systemic deterioration. What Can Be Done to Stop This Damaging Reaction to Stress? The above information is not meant to discourage you. Instead, it is meant to help you understand the complexities of not only the stress reaction but the different methods that can be used to manage the reaction. In fact, it is my intention to instill hope by providing you with the knowledge that you have the resources within you to control the damaging effects of stress. By using these more natural methods, over time you can develop a much more balanced approach to stress that can be more effective than medication without the unwanted side effects. 1) Reduce perceived threat. As you may have gathered from the above description of the GAS, for the stress reaction to occur the body must perceive the event as a threat. The good news is that you have a great deal of control over this process. However, it may take some effort to change your body's perception and reaction. The fight or flight response was developed when our bodies needed to react to very real external physical threats. For instance, in distant human history, when a cave man was confronted by a saber tooth tiger, he needed to respond quickly by either fighting the tiger or fleeing. However, in today's technological age, many of our stressors are not of the external physical type. Many of our stressors are due to psychological threat which involves the perception of an event. For instance, if you have the all-too-common unfortunate event of having to deal with the customer service department of a major corporation, you may experience frustration and stress during this process. However, such stress stems from your perception of the event. If you view the interaction with customer service as deliberately annoying (making you talk to a computer, putting you on hold, friendliness but not helpfulness) and calculated to cause you to give up you are more likely to perceive the situation as a threat. In particular, the threat you perceive is someone barring your way to something you need. Changing the way you perceive the situation can change the amount of stress you experience. For example, when I was recently confronted with this type of situation regarding refused warranty repair of my granddaughter's computer, I used it as a teaching opportunity for my granddaughter. I explained to her the process we would take to obtain the repair under warranty including how we would file a claim in small claims court. Instead of being upset about the computer, my granddaughter was very excited about learning how small claims court worked. In this way, the corporate hurdles of customer service were not seen as a threat but as steps we documented to provide in our claim. For myself, I was able to view the time as productive because I was teaching my granddaughter an important life lesson. However, even more serious psychological threats such as being placed on probationary job status with a demand that your work improve or you will be terminated can be managed with changing the perception of threat. In fact, with such an event it is very important to change this perception or you are less likely to change the work situation. To change your perception of such a threat, you could determine if it is possible to comply with the expectations of your boss. If you determine that it is possible, then the threat diminishes because you have a way to solve the problem. However, if you determine that it is not possible then you could look for other solutions such as looking for another job. The belief that you can find another job also changes your perception of the threat. The process of cognitive therapy aids in changing perception of threat. By identifying the type of thinking involved in your response, you can develop other ways to think about the situation which will change the perception. Sometimes, if you have certain automatic ways of thinking, you may need input from others to give you ideas of how you can think differently about a situation. If you work at changing your automatic perceptions you will develop a different initial response to many common events. In this case, the stress reaction described by the GAS doesn't even get activated. Certainly, this may not be possible if actual physical threat occurs because your body will respond automatically. For instance, if you are physically assaulted on the street or if you have surgery or illness, your body will automatically respond with the GAS reaction. In this case, changing perception may not be possible or may only help to a limited degree. However, with enough training and practice, even physical assault to the body can be perceived differently. For example, in my karate training, a very important part of self-defense was psychological preparation so that we could respond to an attack more effectively. This meant reducing our perception of threat. Yet, it did not mean eliminating the perception of threat because when under physical attack we need the activation of the autonomic nervous system that occurs during the GAS because it prepares our body to respond. However, we don't want to use up our energy stores too soon, so by reducing the perception of threat we are able to think more clearly and react more quickly. 2) Proper nutrition. During prolonged stress we need to replenish our energy reserves. The best way to do this is through proper nutrition. Too often when people are stressed they either experience decreased appetite due to the curtailing the digestive system or they experience sugar, salt, and fat cravings as quick, simple ways to provide the body with energy. Both of these scenarios are problematic because they do not adequately address the nutritional needs to help re-build the energy stores. To re-build the glycogen stores, it is necessary to consume adequate amounts of complex carbohydrates (whole grains, beans, vegetables). To re-build the stores required for protein synthesis it is necessary to consume proteins (meat, cheese, milk, nuts, beans). By paying attention to your body's nutritional needs during stress, you are less likely to experience the adverse consequences of long-term stress. 3) Using mindfulness and relaxation techniques. Once the stress reaction has occurred and on-going stress is experienced, methods to reduce the excessive release of cortisol are necessary. By reducing the release of cortisol, the system can become balanced again and react more normally. This is the goal of anti-depressants. However, it is possible to achieve this goal more efficiently and without side effects with the more natural methods of relaxation and mindfulness. Herbert Benson (who coined the term relaxation response) and colleagues have been researching the biology of relaxation. Although not as much is understood about the biology of the relaxation response as is known about the stress reaction, they are showing that a chemical process occurs in the body to reverse the effects of stress and produce relaxation (Bhasin, et al., 2013). Research has shown that as little as eight weeks of training with the mindfulness and relaxation methods can reduce the secretion of cortisol (Jensen et al., 2012). Methods such as Qi Gong, Tai Chi, and yoga have been found to reduce the inflammation of stress and reduce cortisol which was not shown to occur with aerobic exercise (Lavretsky, 2013). For more information, read: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? Although an immediate course of mindfulness or relaxation training can assist with reducing cortisol and balancing the system, it is best to practice these tools consistently. Similar to exercise, these methods help most by being a lifestyle practicenot just something to use when stressed. The more you make it a part of your lifestyle, the more skilled you will be with the methods, and the more effective the methods will be. For more assistance, read: Too Stressed to Relax? References Bhasin, M.K., Dusek, J.A, Chang, B., Joseph, M.G., Denninger, J.W., Fricchione, G.L., Benson, H. and Libermann, T.A. (2013). Relaxation Response Induces Temporal Transcriptome Changes in Energy Metabolism, Insulin Secretion and Inflammatory Pathways, PLOS ONE, 8, www.plosone.org, e62817 Bowirrat, A., Chen, T.J.H., Blum, K., Madigan, M., Bailey, J.A., Chen, A.L.C., Downs, B.W., Braverman, E.R., Radi, S., Waite, R.L., Kerner, M., Giordano, J., Morse, S., Oscar-Berman, M. and Gold, M. (2010). Neuro-psychopharmacogenetics and Neurological Antecedents of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Unlocking the Mysteries of Resilience and Vulnerability. Current Neuropharmacology, 8, 335-358. Buckingham, J.C. (2007). Glucocorticoids, Role in Stress. In Stress Science: Neuroendocrinology edited by Fink, G. Elsevier, San Diego, CA. DeLongis, A., Coyne, J. C., Dakof, G., Folkman, S., & Lazarus,R. S. (1982). Relationship of daily hassles, uplifts, andmajor life events to health status. Health Psychology, 1, 119136. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.1.2.119 Jensen, C.G., Vangkilde, S., Frokjaer, V. and Hasselbalch, S.G. (2012). Mindfulness Training Affects AttentionOr Is It Attentional Effort? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 106-123. DOI: 10.1037/a0024931. Lavretsky, H. (2013). Mindful Exercises and Meditation: Neurobiological Effects. Psychiatric News, http://psychnews.psychiatryonline.org/newsarticle.aspx?articleid=1680433 NIH (2012). Understanding Autoimmune Diseases. National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. http://www.niams.nih.gov/HEALTH_INFO/Autoimmune/default.asp Sears, B. (2011) The differences between cortisol and cortisone? http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V69oZKhR-Lo Seaward, B.L. (2006). Physiology of Stress (Chapter 2). In Managing Stress: Principles and Strategies for Health and Wellbeing. Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Canada. Saladin, K.S. (2011). Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Ed. McGraw-Hill, New York. Selye, H. (1955). Stress and disease. Science, 122, 625-631. Selye, H. (1974). Stress without distress. Signet, New York. Smith, S.M. and Vale, W.W. (2006). The role of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in neuroendocrine responses to stress. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 8, 383-395. HPA axis is activated in response to positive and negative states of energy balance. Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles RELATIONSHIP INCENTIVE AND SENSITIVITY SCALES The following questionnaire is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. As with many research questionnaires, this questionnaire may not be normed for online participants. Please take this into account when you receive the results. This questionnaire measures sensitivity to incentives (rewards) and threats (negativity) in a relationship. For each of the following eleven items, indicate how much you agree or disagree with what the item says regarding your current romantic relationship or romantic partner.Please be open and honest in your responses. No login required to obtain results. Item 1: I go out of my way to be connected to my romantic partner. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 2: Criticism or scolding from my romantic partner hurts me quite a bit. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 3: When things are going well in my romantic relationship, it draws me to the relationship even more. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 4: I feel worried or upset when I think or know my romantic partner is angry at me. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 5: When I want something good to happen in my romantic relationship, I go all-out to make it happen. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 6: If I think something unpleasant is going to happen in my romantic relationship I usually get pretty "worked up" and upset. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 7: If I see a chance to have something good happen in my romantic relationship, I move on it right away. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 8: I feel worried when I think I've acted poorly in my romantic relationship. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 9: When I see an opportunity to enhance my romantic relationship, I get excited about doing it. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 10: I worry about making mistakes in my romantic relationship. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. Item 11: When I see the possibility of something good happening in my relationship with my romantic partner, I try very hard to make it happen. Very true for me. Somewhat true for me. Somewhat false for me. Very false for me. No login required to obtain results. For authors and more information: Laurenceau, J-P., Kleinman, B. M., Kaczynski, K. J., & Carver, C. S. (2010). Assessment of relationship-specific incentive and threat sensitivities: Predicting satisfaction and affect in adult intimate relationships. Psychological Assessment. RECOMMENDED BOOKS... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Perfectionist or Efficient? The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire assesses personality characteristics that are related to perfectionism, efficiency, organization, and purposefulness (goal orientation). Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: Staying Motivated with a New Exercise Program Uncertainty, Decision-making, and Stress An Easier Way to Achieve Goals that Require Self-control Motivational Psychology: Or, How Everyone Can Benefit From Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? The Value of Each and Every Life and How Perfectionism Destroys that Value Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? More questionnaires: List of PsychTests Your Happiness Assessment Cognitive Styles Test Self-Esteem Self-Efficacy How Social Are You? For authors and more information: Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, C. R., & Gough, H. C. (2006). The International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84-96. International Personality Item Pool: A Scientific Collaboratory for the Development of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences (http://ipip.ori.org/). Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Index of Passive-Aggressive Examples "Although personality styles tend to be stable over time due to the genetics of being born with certain temperaments, the specific behaviors natural to certain personalities can be learned and used by those with other styles. Therefore, no matter your personality style you can still develop a resistance to bullying." Tweet Bullying at work can often be so subtle that it is difficult to report without appearing to be overly sensitive or petty. Most people are not overtly bullied with physical attacks or threats of violence because these behaviors can be easily identified and reported. Instead, most bullying at work is a passive-aggressive type that is usually a combination of subtle behaviors that the perpetrator can easily deny as being misunderstood. Some examples: 1) Withholding. A co-worker doesn't provide you with necessary information for a task and your performance is affected. The co-worker can claim they didn't realize you didn't have the information. 2) Excessive oversight. Your boss monitors your work constantly, questioning everything that you do. Your boss can claim that is his/her management style or that s/he was concerned about the project and your performance. 3) Gossip. It is especially difficult to control or report gossip because it can be unclear who started it and it is whispered behind your back. 4) Facial expressions. How do you report sarcastic facial expressions? She rolls her eyes whenever I voice an opinion may be difficult to prove without appearing sensitive. 5) Teasing. The same behavior can have two different meanings when a person is teased by a friend or by someone they don't get along with. The bully can claim that it was just friendly teasing and it wasn't meant to hurt. 6) Frequent criticism. Your boss focuses on your mistakes, is quick to point out errors but doesn't give you credit for successes. As you can see from some of the examples, it may be difficult to eliminate workplace bullying because it just becomes more passive-aggressive and hidden. Also, it may not be any one behavior but a combination of events that add up to bullying. A person knows they are being bullied by how the behavior makes them feel but it can be difficult to pinpoint the exact behaviors when the bullying is passive-aggressive. Reader's Example: Back-stabbing Doctor/Co-worker Question: A doctor I work with feels I am "too proud" and independent in my work. He dislikes my personality, and that's ok--we don't have to be buddies. But he has taken to telling each new group of residents that there is no point discussing anything with me because I am overbearing. He tells them they should just avoid discussion and agree with me. When I present an assessment in rounds he covers his eyes and bows his head. After he leaves, if I need to speak to one of the residents about a patient having problems, I can see them bracing themselves as I approach or rolling their eyes even though we may have never yet spoken to each other! I am viewed as a competant and compassionate doctor by families and co-workers, but this treatment is distracting and disheartening. It is making it difficult to provide safe care, to the point that I have considered leaving my practice. Response Yet, workplace bullying can have profound effects on the recipients including anxiety and/or depression or even post-traumatic stress disorder. It can undermine a person's confidence, affect their performance, and preclude them from consideration for promotions. However, some people are more resistant to workplace bullying so that it doesn't have the impact upon them. Learning to be resistant can prevent bullies from being rewarded for their behavior by hindering their agenda which may even change their behavior when their attempts to bully backfires. Research shows that certain personality styles are more resistant to bullying (Plopa et al., 2017). Although personality styles tend to be stable over time due to the genetics of being born with certain temperaments, the specific behaviors natural to certain personalities can be learned and used by those with other styles. Therefore, no matter your personality style you can still develop a resistance to bullying. Personality configurations and vulnerability to bullying 1) The cooperative achiever. This style is resistant to bullying and depicts those who tend to have a stable mood with low anxiety, high agreeableness, and high conscientiousness. People who are highly agreeable tend to give others the benefit of the doubt. Instead of interpreting behavior as negative and hurtful, they are more likely to interpret it as unintentional or that the person is under stress or having a bad day. In this way, they do not take the behavior personally and are less likely to be reactive to it. When high conscientiousness is combined with emotional stability and agreeableness, the person is motivated and persistent with a positive attitude toward work. They are likely to be cooperative with others and to seek help or social support when needed. They usually trust others, are compassionate and concerned about others, thus having good interpersonal relationships. 2) The social optimist. This style is also resistant to bullying and describes someone who is emotionally stable, outgoing and is open to new experiences. This person tends to be self-confident, social, composed, resistant to stress, more likely to seek social support if needed and less likely to interpret events in a negative way. When this style is combined with high conscientiousness it depicts the entrepreneurial type of personality with a high degree of psychological flexibility which is least vulnerable to stress and bullying. 3) The disagreeable perfectionist. This style with its emotional instability, low agreeableness, and high conscientiousness is vulnerable to workplace bullying. Often considered a double-edged sword, conscientiousness can be protective when focusing on work is used to distract from and alleviate the stress of the emotional environment. However, when conscientiousness is combined with perfectionistic expectations, negativity, and disagreeableness, well-being suffers in the face of bullying. People with this style tend to be obstinate, determined, prone to verbal aggression but less likely to engage in physical aggression due to the conscientiousness holding them to a higher standard. A person who is highly conscientious but also negative often suffers from low self-esteem or will focus the negativity outward by blaming others for not doing things right. As a result of their disagreeableness and demands of others they are also more likely to create a negative reaction from others. 4) The socially anxious nonconformist. This individual may be anxious and shy but also tends to be unconventional and open to new experience. This combination makes them more vulnerable to bullying. People who are open to experience tend to feel both negative and positive emotions intensely. When combined with optimism, emotional stability, and extraversion this quality tends to be protective because they are able to experience more positive emotions and are able to release negative emotions through social support. However, when combined with social anxiety and withdrawal, their unconventional attitudes may cause them to stand out in a more negative way and be susceptible to bullying. Thus, this individual experiences stress due to feeling pulled in different directions: a desire to be different but anxiety about being noticed in a negative manner. 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People The most difficult social conflict usually involves passive-aggressive (PA) behavior. The reason it is more distressing than even aggressive behavior is because it causes the recipient to be doubtful of him or her self. When someone is aggressive towards you, their intention is clear and it is easier to make a decision such as I need to steer clear of this person or I need to report this behavior. However, the purpose of passive-aggressive behavior is for the aggressor to avoid responsibility for their actions. PA behavior can easily be denied or blame shifted: I didn't mean it the way you took it or You're being too sensitive or You're just trying to get me in trouble. As a result, PA behavior cannot be addressed in the same way you might handle aggressive behavior. When managing PA people you need to be aware of the underlying purpose of the behavior so that you can respond in a way that prevents them from succeeding at their agenda. The less likely they are to achieve their goal, the more likely you will see a reduction in their behavior. Read more... What are the behaviors of the resistant personalities that can be learned? You may not be able to change your personality, but by copying the behaviors of these personality styles you may be able to reduce the impact of workplace bullying. Personality may be set to some degree by genetics but behavior is a choice and can be learned. For instance, I had a client who was socially anxious, introverted, and depressed, all characteristics that made her more vulnerable to bullying, who was being bullied and sexually harassed by her boss. Reporting his behaviors was not effective because the behaviors were subtle and subject to interpretation. So we focused on her being direct and assertive with him. When he engaged in any inappropriate behaviors, she identified those behaviors to him and told him they were inappropriate. If he protested that he didn't mean anything by his behavior, she told him, Whether or not you intend to hurt me, I'm telling you that it does and I want you to stop. Although initially she was convinced she would lose her job, not only did he stop harassing her but he promoted her to a leadership position. There are a number of behaviors the resistant personalities may engage in naturally. However, these protective behaviors can also be learned by other personalities: 1) Seek social support. A primary way of coping with stress is through the support of othershaving someone to talk to or get advice from or commiserate with improves resistance to bullying. An introvert does not need a large social group but they can benefit from a few or even one trusted associate. 2) Pleasant. Being pleasant with a positive focus on others can help a person resist bullying. One reason for this is that the agenda of a bully is to create conflict or distress so when they are unable to do this their behavior may backfire by causing them to feel frustrated. In addition, being generally pleasant will cause others to be more supportive of you and less likely to validate the bully. 3) Optimistic. An optimist tends to expect positive outcomes so in the face of bullying they tend to look for ways to problem-solve. Instead of focusing on the negative aspects of the situation they tend to find ways to manage it effectively. 4) Positive interpretations. Those who are resistant to bullying tend to make positive or at least neutral interpretations of the bully's behavior. One type of interpretation is that they are less likely to see themselves as the cause of others' negative behavior. They also may be more likely to view the bully in a more compassionate way instead of seeing the behavior as malicious. One way of doing this is to recognize that many of us have reacted in hurtful ways when stressed. 5) Non-perfectionistic effort. Those who resist bullying are unlikely to be perfectionists. Instead, they strive for excellence but can accept mistakes. Instead of failure contributing to a negative self-concept they see it as an opportunity to learn and change. They are persistent in their efforts because they don't accept failure as a reason to quit. For more, read: Excellence vs. Perfection. 6) Psychologically flexible. Having the ability to adapt and change behavior when a situation calls for it helps a person to be more resistant to bullying. Instead of focusing on expecting others or the situation to change they focus on what they have control of which typically is their own behavior. As a result, they are more likely to find solutions. For more, read: Coping with Change: Psychological Flexibility. 7) Positive self-concept. Those who are resistant to bullying are likely to have a positive self-concept so the bullying is less likely to affect their self-confidence or perspective of themselves. Instead, they see the bullying as a problem in the other person and find ways to protect themselves from it. For more on changing the self-concept, read: 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem. What can be done when you are bullied at work? In addition to making yourself less vulnerable to bullying by developing more of the above behaviors, the following list some steps you can take to manage the situation. 1) Promote yourself. Write down your accomplishments and how you are an asset to the business. When you write your achievements it reminds you of the truth about yourself and your work performance. As a result you are more likely to promote yourself and your accomplishments to those in positions that matter. Don't allow bullying to let you become passive or decrease your confidence. Build yourself up so that you can see the reality. 2) Be assertive. Learn communication skills to effectively manage passive-aggressive behavior. Confront behavior but do it in a way that works. For more, read: 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People. 3) Document patterns. Usually bullying isn't just one instance but a pattern of behavior. So document the behaviors that occur and be sure to include your responses showing how you tried to handle it. When documenting write a word for word account and specific behavior descriptions without your interpretation. For instance, instead of writing He tried to humiliate me, write He pointed out my mistake repeatedly in a group setting saying 'I can't believe you did this.' 4) Report. Once you have the documentation and your efforts have not changed the situation, get assistance by reporting the behavior. Plopa, M., Plopa, W. and Skuzinska, A. (2017). Bullying at Work, Personality and Subjective Well-Being. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 22, 1927. DOI:10.1037/a0040320 Copyright 2017 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles This site provides a number of resources from mindfulness-based cognitive-behavioral therapy (MCBT) methods to help you cope with life problems and to become the best person you can be. Sometimes this site can be overwhelming because there are so many resources. The following are some general guides to help you start. Then, select the categories that are most relevant to your situation. Resources Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Did You Know Psychotherapy has Stronger Scientific Evidence than Many Common Medical Procedures? Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? App: CBT Tools for Healthy Living Audios Panic Assistance Mindful Grounding All anxiety assistance audios Articles 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety How to Manage Panic and Anxiety 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Developing Tolerance of Anxiety All anxiety articles Learn to manage anxiety> Audios Depression Assistance and Education Managing Insomnia Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury Articles I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where Do I Start? Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment All depression articles Take steps to cope with depression> Don't Accept Criticism Without Evaluating the Source How can criticism overload be avoided? One of the best ways to avoid criticism overload is to evaluate it before accepting it. This can be difficult to do because you need to listen to the criticism to evaluate it which can cause distress and affect self-esteem. However, one way to decrease the amount of criticism you absorb is to first evaluate the source of the criticism before even listening to it. Read more... Related: The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Understanding Mindfulness Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Step 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Mindfulness Practice Exercises Create a more mindful life> Managing Stress Audios Stress Education Quick stress relief Relaxation Articles Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help List of Stress Management Methods Learn to handle stress> Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log What triggers my stress? When am I not as depressed? Are my headaches associated with certain places or people? Is my treatment effective? The Mood Log feature of the app not only gives you a place to record your daily moods but it will provide an analysis of how different activities or events can impact your moods. Read more... Passive-Aggressive Behavior Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing With Passive-Aggressive People 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Methods to deal with passive-aggression> Self-esteem & Self-efficacy Audios Self-Esteem Blackboard All self-esteem improvement audios Articles 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy All self-concept articles Improve self-esteem> Motivation Audios Hot Air Balloon Motivation Sport Motivation All motivational audios Articles Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Motivation: Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Become more motivated> Questionnaires Cognitive Styles Test: Learn about your thinking styles to improve your life Your Happiness Assessment: Discover what interferes with your happiness General Self-efficacy: Your belief in your abilities Self-Esteeem: What is the attitude you have towards yourself? Perceived Control Scale: Assess the degree of control you believe you have Perfectionist or Efficient? Does perfectionism interfere with your life? CES-Depression: Do you have depression? Social Anxiety: Assess your degree of social anxiety List of PsychTests Audios When You Have Been Betrayed Loving Kindness Meditation Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Forgiveness and the Process of Healing Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Audios Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Lies You Were Taught as a Child Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Building Blocks Emotion Training Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? When Everyone is Traumatized What Happens to Those Who Are Truly Suffering? Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Audios Choosing Happiness Loving Kindness Meditation Compassion Meditation Mindfulness Articles The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions Happiness is An Attitude Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Questionnaire Your Happiness Assessment Bring happiness into your life> Audios Jealousy Assistance 5 Methods to Managing Anger Mindfulness Training Articles When Is Jealousy Irrational? What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Jealousy: When the Damage is Done What to Do When Your Partner's Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Relationship Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy, and Impact on Relationships How to start handling your jealousy> Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Happiness The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) The first and most important key to finding happiness may be the most difficult for many people (especially those reading this article): To find happiness you must not seek it! In other words, the more you try to find happiness, the more it will elude you. I think Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864) said it best, Happiness is a butterfly, which when pursued, is always just beyond your grasp, but which, if you will sit down quietly, may alight upon you. However, don't be discouraged. You can do many things to create a life where happiness is more likely to find you. Yet, the same caveat applies: If you do everything for the purpose of finding happiness, you may achieve much, but you are not likely to find happiness. Researcher Mauss and colleagues (2012) who found that the higher the value a person places on being happy, the more likely they are to be unhappy, stated, encouraging a mindset to maximize happiness (as some self-help books do) may be counterproductive. The reason happiness becomes elusive the more you strive for it is due to creating a fixed desire of achieving happiness. Read more... Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions--page 1 SUGGESTION 1: USING THE SUGGESTIONS The following is a list of 50 suggestions to help you focus on using the cognitive-behavioral therapy(CBT) methods to create the conditions for happiness, a frequently elusive but fairly simple feat when happiness is truly understood. Happiness is not something you achieve. In fact, the more you try to find happiness, the less likely you will be happy. Happiness occurs by how you live your life. Certain lifestyle practices have been shown to be associated with increased happiness. It may be difficult initially to incorporate the lifestyle practices into your daily routine, but the more you do so, the more opportunity you create for happiness to find you. For those of you with Android devices, the Excel At Life's Happy Habits can assist you with developing the lifestyle practices. However, those without an Android device can still use these same methods. All the audios are included on this website and the assessment will be as well. The following list of suggestions are things you can do to help you learn to develop these lifestyle practices as well as to identify obstacles to your happiness and provide you with tools to address those obstacles. Some of the suggestions are simpler and some are more involved. It is better to start with something simple that you feel fairly certain you can achieve. That way you are less likely to feel discouraged. Not all the suggestions are relevant for all people. So, review the list, read the detailed descriptions, and choose what is most likely to work for you. Read more... Happy Habits: Choose Happiness! This app uses the techniques of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) from the positive psychology research to provide comprehensive tools to help create the conditions for happiness in your life. You also have the option of signing up for the AchieveMint.com rewards program that provides cash rewards for engaging in self-improvement activities in this app and others. Contains: Your Happiness Assessment--119 item test assessing 14 factors that can affect happiness providing you with detailed results and suggestions Choosing Happiness Audio to help understand happiness and how to create the conditions for happiness Happiness Journal to create affirmations, record positive events, and a Happy To Do list selected from suggestions 50 suggestions from CBT to increase the opportunity for happiness--you can also add your own! Points feature that allows you to track which suggestions you do each day Graph feature that allows you to view your daily points and progress Articles about happiness and cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) Emotion Training audios to help you learn to manage emotions and create a more positive attitude Relaxation Audios to learn deep relaxation Install PsychNotes The Only Way to Have a Balanced Life is to Do It Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Why You Don't Need to Be Happy Buying Happiness: It Can Be Done! Not Happy? Just Wait... Is It True that Parents are Less Happy than Non-parents? How Can Each of Us Make a Difference in the World? Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong The Danger of Seeking Happiness: How to Protect Your Children The Pursuit of Happiness or the Pursuit of Money? Can't Force Happiness on Someone "I Like It When You..." Money May Not Buy Happiness, But How You Spend Money May Help Want to Live a Long and Happy Life? Harnessing Happiness When You Have Depression Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! mHealth Happiness Seekers and Effectiveness Getting Better With Age: Improved Well-being Intelligence, Health and Happiness Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You For many years when my husband and I were first together I would ask him "When are things going to get better?" We were dealing with the usual stressors that couples face: not enough time, not enough money, and the inevitable random events such as family conflict, deaths of loved ones, illnesses and injuries. In addition, for most of our early years together I was in school and struggling with the balancing of demands of advanced education, part-time work, and a family. But I had the belief that we were working towards this perfect life that one day would emerge shining a rainbow of happiness forever over us. My husband, inclined more toward the practical, just answered my question of "When are things going to get better?," with "Another six months." That answer typically pacified me for awhile because I thought I could handle any amount of stress for six months. However, a point would occur when I once again I asked my husband "When are things going to get better?" Once again, he would answer "Another six months." This scenario occurred fairly routinely for many years. However, fortunately during this time I had experiences that began to teach me about my expectations of life. In particular, when I was completing my internship at the Veterans Administration Medical Center I had the opportunity to work on the spinal cord injury unit. That experience forever changed my thinking. In particular, I was struck by the differences in attitude among the patients. Read more... One day when I was sevenyearsold my father allowed me to choose our Sunday family activity. He said we could either take a drive across the Mississippi River or ride on the last streetcar in St. Louis. At that time of my life I had never seen an ocean or even a great lake and I was awed by the vastness of the Mississippi River. It never occurred to me that the river would always be there and the streetcars might not. I chose the river. Of course, driving across the river took all of fifteen seconds. Immediately after we crossed the bridge I regretted my decision. My regret at the time was that the streetcar excursion would have been lengthier. My regret later was that I never again had the opportunity to ride a streetcar in St. Louis. My father could have protected me from my regret and sadness. He could have taken me on a streetcar anyway or have convinced me that I had made the wrong decision. However, he allowed the decision to stand and allowed me to deal with the consequential emotions. I don't know what he intended, but I do believe that he was trying to be a good father that day. Read more... Listening to the weather forecast one frigid day, I realized how much we are influenced by the catastrophic thinking of the media. The weatherman reported, "The weather has brought more misery to the St. Louis area." Certainly, the weather was causing problems that day. An ice storm caused car doors and locks to be frozen so that people had a great deal of trouble getting into their cars. However, I thought, unless someone was in the middle of nowhere with no cell phone and they were unable to open their car door because of the ice, this was not "misery." Instead, I would call it an "inconvenience." Most of us walked out to our cars to find that we couldn't open the door, went back inside a warm house or office, and found some solution to our problem. Read more... A serious problem exists with the public's understanding of depression. The problem occurs because of the clinical term "Major Depression" and the general use of the word "depression." One of the definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary indicates that depression is "a state of feeling sad." Therefore, the general public typically defines "depression" interchangeably with "sadness" as in "I'm so depressed today." The tendency, then, is to assume that clinical depression is just extreme sadness or the inability to handle normal stress and sadness of life. This assumption is not only wrong but it is a disservice to all individuals who experience one of the clinical forms of depression: Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder, Depression NOS (Not Otherwise Specified), or Adjustment Disorder with Depression. Read more... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles CBT Audio Articles The following articles have audio versions: EXCELLENCE VS. PERFECTION Striving for excellence involves setting realistic, achievable goals rather than perfectionistic demands. HOW DO WE CHANGE IRRATIONAL THINKING? Provides an overview of how cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) works. THE PILLARS OF THE SELF-CONCEPT: SELF-ESTEEM AND SELF-EFFICACY Discusses how signs of low self-esteem and self-efficacy and how to improve the overall self-concept. WHY ARE PEOPLE MEAN? DON'T TAKE IT PERSONALLY! Explains the different types of "mean" behavior. Understanding it can help prevent personalization. CATASTROPHE? OR, INCONVENIENCE? Recognizing that situations are inconveniences rather than catastrophes can help with coping. USE YOUR HEAD! AND YOUR HEART! Describes emotional reasoning which is the tendency to believe emotions are accurate without evaluating them. BUT IT HAPPENED BEFORE! Generalizing is the irrational belief that because something occurred one time it is more likely to occur again. WHEN THE NEED FOR CONTROL GETS OUT OF CONTROL Examines the Internal Control Fallacy of needing to be in control and responsible for everything and the External Control Fallacy which is believing everything that happens is due to luck or uncontrollable circumstances. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Panic While Driving Education If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Panic Assistance While Driving If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Panic While Driving Education Frequently, people who have panic attacks develop a fear of having a panic attack while driving a car. They are afraid they will lose control and hurt themselves or others. For most people this fear is based upon inaccurate assumptions about panic attacks and how an attack can affect driving. Although there are a few people who may have medical conditions that can be triggered by a panic attack, most people who have panic attacks can safely drive or make the decision to determine the need to stop driving while calming themselves. If you have been checked out physically by your physician and cleared for driving, this audio can help explain why you can safely drive with a panic attack. View Transcript Listen Panic Assistance While Driving This audio can help coach you while having a panic attack when driving. It is meant to be used for therapeutic driving exposures when challenging the avoidance of driving. It is not meant for general coaching. Listen to the Panic While Driving Education audio prior to using this audio during driving. Consult with your therapist and obtain clearance from your physician prior to using. For more information, read Managing Panic and Anxiety Attacks. View Transcript Before downloading and using this audio, indicate that you understand and agree with the following terms: I have read Excel At Life's Terms of Use. I have listened to the Panic While Driving Education audio. I have been cleared to drive by a physician who is aware of my panic attacks. I have discussed using this audio with my therapist. Listen Transcript: Panic While Driving Education A problem for many people who have panic attacks is the fear of having a panic attack while driving. Typically they are fearful of losing control and hurting themselves or others. Frequently, they may stop driving altogether due to the fear of having a panic attack while driving. If this is true for you, the following information can help you gain greater control over your life by fully understanding the nature of panic and how to manage your anxiety. The following educational information should be fully understood before using the Panic Assistance While Driving audio. Also, prior to using the Panic Assistance While Driving be sure to have a full medical evaluation as well as an independent person who can determine your driving ability while you are having a panic attack. For those who have such clearance the following is necessary to understand to effectively use the Panic Assistance While Driving audio. The first thing to keep in mind is that a panic attack is the flight or fight response. What this means is that your body is preparing to deal with a threat. Although this threat is not a physical threat such as an attacker, your body perceives and prepares for it in the same way. When your body prepares to deal with a threat it is actually at a higher level of awareness and ability to react than normal. The symptoms you experience during a panic attack are due to the way the body prepares itself. For instance, during a threat you need to react quickly so your body speeds up your heart rate and respiration as well as tenses your muscles. This, as well as other physical reactions, is the normal behavior of the body when a threat is perceived. In the case of having a panic while driving the threat is the fear of having a panic attack. Most likely, at some point you had a spontaneous, out-of-the-blue panic attack while driving. This first attack could have been due to stress or lack of sleep or excessive caffeine or numerous other possible causes. However, it was most likely terrifying to have a panic attack while driving because you FELT out-of-control. This doesn't mean you were out-of-control, but that is how you felt. You probably had catastrophic thoughts related to being out-of-control such as What if I lost control of the car? or What if I passed out? I could have had an accident! This type of incident accompanied by the catastrophic thinking increases the likelihood that you will have other panic attacks while driving. In other words, the first panic attack occurred spontaneously but, most likely, you have created the following panic attacks due to your fear of having another one while driving. By understanding this and understanding what a panic attack is, you can reduce the occurrence of panic while driving or at least be able to tolerate it so it doesn't interfere with your mobility. Although a panic attack feels terrifying, it is a normal response of the body. As a normal response it is meant to help you, not hurt you. For instance, unless there is some other medical condition, people don't pass out during a panic attack because that would not be a good way for the body to handle a threat. The body is trying to prepare you to either face the threat or to run to protect yourself. If you have been cleared by your physician and do not have other medical conditions that can cause a loss of consciousness you won't pass out during a panic attack. The physical explanation for this is that when you have a panic attack you will have an increase in blood pressure whereas fainting is due to a decrease in blood pressure. In addition, you don't need to worry about the increase in blood pressure because the normal body can handle temporary increases in blood pressure. Changes in blood pressure are normal under certain circumstances such as when the body is preparing for a threat and activating the flight-or-fight response. Since it is normal, it is not something to be concerned with. In addition to the fear of passing out, people who have a fear of having a panic attack while driving may fear that they won't be able to handle driving, that somehow they will lose control of the car. However, as I always point out to my clients, you didn't lose control of the car during your first panic attack and have an accident. You didn't take your hands off the wheel, close your eyes and start screaming. And if it didn't happen during the first panic attack when you were least prepared for it, why would it happen now when you are more prepared for it? As I said earlier, a panic attack occurs because the body is preparing for a threat. Because you are prepared you are more able to react and handle an emergency situation. So even though people might say to me I felt like I couldn't stay in my lane or I barely was able to pull the car over to the side, the evidence is that they WERE able to drive and WERE able to pull over. Even though they didn't feel like they were thinking clearly, they were able to think, react, and handle driving. The reason it might seem like you are not thinking clearly during these times is because the brain speeds up and reacts more automatically during emergency situations. Generally, people don't trust these more automatic reactions because they don't seem reasoned out. However, for certain behaviors with which we are quite familiar our brain is very capable of engaging more automatically in problem-solving and reacting to a threat. Notice, however, I did say when we engage in familiar behaviors. Obviously, if you are just learning to drive and have a panic attack you may not be able to react in this automatic way because your brain hasn't learned the procedure. However, a panic attack does not affect the driving ability of experienced drivers. Another issue many people have when learning methods to manage their panic is the fear that focusing on breathing or other relaxation methods will also interfere with driving. However, if, under normal circumstances, you are able to drive while talking to a companion, listening to the radio or an audio book, or even just thinking about something other than driving, you should be able to safely use the breathing and relaxation methods. However, it is important to be thoroughly familiar with these methods prior to using them while driving when having a panic attack. It is best to become skilled with the deep relaxation and breathing methods when you are not anxious. Practicing these methods daily will help you to become more skilled with them. Then, once you are skilled with the methods, it is best to practice them while driving when you are not having a panic attack. If you have panic attacks whenever you get in a car you may need to start by sitting in your car and practicing the methods. Then expand that to driving on your neighborhood street or around a deserted parking lot. In this way you can get used to relying on the breathing and relaxation methods while driving. These methods can become more automatic with practice so that you don't have to think too much about them. Once you are prepared by practicing both the self-talk and the relaxation methods described in this audio, then you can use the Panic Assistance While Driving audio to help you remember and utilize the tools you have practiced. Transcript: Panic While Driving Assistance Before you use this audio to help you with panic attacks while driving be sure you have listened to the Panic While Driving Education audio and that you are thoroughly skilled in using the relaxation methods to calm yourself. In addition, do not listen to this audio for the first time when having a panic attack while drivingit is important to be familiar with it before using it for panic. The purpose of this audio is to help remind you of your skills when having a panic attack while driving. Focus on what I am saying. Take a deep breath and listen to what I am telling you. A panic attack will NOT hurt you. It is a normal way that the body works. You do not need to be afraid of it. Even though you might feel out-of-control, you are NOT out-of-control. In fact, anxiety is the body preparing for an emergency. Your body KNOWS what it needs to do. You need to trust in that. Now, take a breath. Just focus on your breath. A panic attack will not hurt you. Even though you may be driving now, you are still able to drive safely, or if you need to, at least until you can pull over in a safe place and calm yourself down. Many people have had panic attacks while driving. Even though it feels terrifying, it doesn't mean you are in danger. Do you feel in danger if you laugh at a joke while driving? Do you feel in danger if you feel sad while driving? These are just different emotions. Anxiety is just a sensationit doesn't CAUSE you to act in any particular way. In fact, many people with anxiety can hide their anxiety symptoms so well that even those close to them don't know they are having a panic attack. That is because anxiety isn't a behavior. It is an internal emotion. Continue to focus on what I am saying. Take a deep breath and listen to what I am telling you. A panic attack will NOT hurt you. It is a normal way that the body works. You do not need to be afraid of it. Even though you might feel out-of-control, you are NOT out-of-control. In fact, anxiety is the body preparing for an emergency. Your body KNOWS what it needs to do. You need to trust in that. Since anxiety is an emotion, you have a choice in your behavior. Just because you feel an emotion doesn't mean you will act in a certain way. You have a choice. Just because you feel out-of-control doesn't mean you will be out-of-control. You have a choice. A feeling isn't the same as behavior. Now, again, take a breath. Notice your breath. Notice your shoulders relaxing as you exhale. As I said, a feeling isn't the same as behavior. Have you ever taken your hands off the steering wheel, closed your eyes and started screaming because you were having a panic attack? I doubt it. Instead, you had the presence of mind to do what you needed to do to be safe. A panic attack is the flight-or-fight system of the body being activated to protect you from threat. Instead of endangering you, this system of the body is meant to protect you. Sure, some of the symptoms feel very uncomfortable and even terrifying but each symptom has a purpose. Rapid heart beat and breathing rate is to increase your ability to react quickly. The tension in your muscles sometimes experienced as pain in the chest and shoulders is to prepare your muscles to respond. If you have an upset stomach it is because your body shuts down unnecessary systems such as digestion so that your whole body can focus on responding to the threat. Even the tunnel vision is normal with the flight-or-fight response because when threatened it is best to stay focused on the threat right in front of you. Again, take a deep breath and remind yourself that all the symptoms you are experiencing are a normal reaction of the body when it feels threatened. Because it is a normal reaction, it will not hurt you. You WILL be okay. This is just a feeling. You are NOT out-of-control even though you might feel that way. Now, as you breath slowly, let the relaxation flow into your shoulders and down into your arms. All the way down your arms and into your hands. Notice your hands. Frequently, when people have a panic attack while driving they have a death grip on the steering wheel. This only makes your muscles more tense and less reactive. So focus on letting the muscles in your hands relax. You still have a hold of the steering wheel but as your muscles in your hands relax you can feel the tension leaving your shoulders and the rest of your body beginning to relax. Take a breath and let your body relax. It may be difficult to do this at first. Many people feel with panic believe they are less in control when the body is relaxed. However, your muscles are able to react quickly from a relaxed state. Even as you relax you will still be in a normal state of tension. This means you will still have full awareness and reaction. Take another slow breath and remind yourself that you are in control. That you have choice about what to do even when you are in a state of panic. You have had panic attacks before. Even though you feel like you are losing control, you don't. And you don't lose control because panic is a normal system of the body that is activated to protect you. It's job is to protect you. Trust your body. What you are experiencing won't hurt you. Because you are afraid of having a panic while driving your brain interprets driving as a threat. However, you can help your brain reinterpret driving by recognizing that you don't need to be afraid of panic. It is just a normal process of the body. As you start to lose your fear of panic while driving, you will have fewer panic attacks. The more you can believe So what if I panic? It won't hurt me the panic attacks will start to become less intense and decrease in frequency. This is because it is your fear of the panic that is giving it power over you. Take another slow breath. Let your muscles relax as you exhale. If you notice tension in your hands, arms, or shoulders, let those muscles relax. Remember, even though you might feel symptoms like weakness or dizziness, healthy people do NOT pass out from panic attacks. When you have a panic attack, blood pressure increases somewhat. However, passing out is due to a decrease in blood pressure. Unless you have some other condition, you will NOT pass out. And you've been checked out by your physician and you KNOW you are safe to drive physically. Again, take a breath. Focus completely on that breath. Notice the air coming into your lungs. Notice the air leaving your lungs. Let the muscles in your upper body relax. You WILL be okay. The panic cannot hurt you. It is just a physical experience of emotions. It cannot hurt you anymore than being excited about something can hurt you. Are you afraid of losing control and having an accident when you are excited? Most people aren't because they recognize they can feel different emotional reactions and still be able to drive competently. Certainly, however, you need to assess your ability to focus on your driving. For instance, if you are crying and can't see very well due to the tears you need to pull over when you are safely able to do so. Take a breath and remind yourself that the body can react effectively and quickly during a panic because anxiety is to prepare you to react. Even the fact that you are able to have catastrophic thoughts about losing control and having an accident shows that you are able to think during a panic attack. Your brain does not shut down. The opposite is true. It is working at a heightened level. Which is also why you are able to have many different thoughts while having a panic attack while driving. You ARE able to think. You haven't lost control of your ability to problem-solve and to reason out how to handle this situation. Take another breath while relaxing your upper body. Remind yourself that it only FEELS out-of-control. You are still able to think, able to react, and are fully in control. Anxiety doesn't affect your behavior or ability to make decisions and to act. You are still thinking. You can still make choices. And you will be okay because you are in control of your behavior. If you need to, you can listen to this audio again to help you cope with your panic attack. Copyright 2015 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Self-Esteem Improvement Audios Self-Esteem Improvement Full Version Self-Esteem Self-Talk Self-Esteem Train Self-Esteem Blackboard Related reading: 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy PsychNotes: Self-Esteem Self-Esteem Improvement Full Version If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Self-Esteem Improvement Full Version with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Self-Esteem Self-Talk If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Self-Esteem Self-Talk with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Self-Esteem Train If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Self-Esteem Train with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Self-Esteem Blackboard If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Tweet Self-Esteem Improvement Full Version Audio rational thinking exercise focused on improving self-esteem and reducing negative self-evaluation by changing self-talk. This exercise is best used when you have already completed reading about rational self-talk so that you know the basic methods of how to talk rationally to yourself. It doesn't tell you what to say to yourself but guides you through exercises and opportunities to change self-talk. The full version includes both the Self-Esteem Self-Talk and the Self-Esteem Train. Therefore, it is about 35 minutes long. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Self-Esteem Self-Talk Audio rational thinking exercise focused on improving self-esteem and reducing negative self-evaluation by changing self-talk. This audio is included in the Self-Esteem Improvement Full Version. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a car! Voice only version With music version Self-Esteem Train Audio rational thinking exercise focused on improving self-esteem by having you visualize a train ride through your life and changing your self-talk regarding different events in your life. This exercise is best used when you have already completed reading about rational self-talk so that you know the basic methods of how to talk rationally to yourself. It doesn't tell you what to say to yourself but guides you through exercises and opportunities to change self-talk. This audio is included in the Self-Esteem Improvement Full Version. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a car! Voice only version With music version Self-Esteem Blackboard Audio rational thinking exercise focused on improving self-esteem by having you visualize writing your negative self-talk on a blackboard and erasing it to change it to more positive self-talk. This exercise is best used when you have already completed reading about rational self-talk so that you know the basic methods of how to talk rationally to yourself. It doesn't tell you what to say to yourself but guides you through exercises and opportunities to change self-talk. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a car! Listen Self-esteem and Self-efficacy The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Selfies: A Sign of Low Self-esteem? Think Again Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Empathy Requires a Strong Sense of Self Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem "Common Sense" Approach to Praise Can Worsen Self-esteem in Vulnerable Children Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Relationships I'm sure you've dealt with individuals who have caused you to be so frustrated that afterwards you scratch your head asking "Am I crazy?" Most likely you just had an encounter with a passive-aggressive person. Such encounters may include sarcasm, shifting blame, saying one thing while meaning another to name a few. For instance, I used to know a co-worker who was very skilled at giving back-handed compliments such as "You look great! You must be doing something different" as well as sarcasm disguised as a compliment "Oh, I hear you've managed to pull off another miracle." The problem with these kinds of comments is that if you try to confront them about the insult, you will be accused of not understanding, "I didn't mean it that way" or of misinterpreting, "You must have a problem to think that. I was just trying to compliment you. Sorry I didn't word it right to suit you." As a result, you end up looking like the bad guy, feeling frustrated, and asking yourself, "Am I crazy?" And the other person walks away blameless. Read more... PsychNotes Steps to Reduce Holiday Stress When Encountering Family Demands You Have to Be Willing to Set Limits with Disrespectful Adult Children Escaping the Rubber Fence" Family Young Adults Can Improve Romantic Relationships by Learning to Be Okay Alone Do You Love Me? Do You REALLY Love Me? Do You Understand Me? Conflict in Relationships Toxic Parents: Mean or Emotionally Distressed? I've Been There Doesn't Always Mean I Support You Mindful Dating: How Does Mindfulness Affect Satisfaction in Relationships? When Bad Things Happen, Share the Good Do You Seek Reassurance of Love? That Might Be Okay...Unless... Successful Marriages Require Emotional Control What You Watch Influences Your Romantic Beliefs "I Like It When You..." Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Connecting Through Emotions When to Criticize Your Partner Don't Be Too Unselfish in a Group--You Might Be Removed Laugh in the Face of Adversity: Reducing Stress During Marital Conflict Superman Effect? Wear Red to Attract Women Body Image and Marital Satisfaction "I Think She Wants Me!" A Study of Sexual Misperception Security in Relationships Related to Less Dishonesty Forgiveness Isn't Always the Best Policy Marital Conflict: When Bad is Good and When It's Bad Time Plus Value: Equation for Forgiveness? Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability Tell Others About Your Good Fortune...If They're Likely to Be Happy For You Mindfulness Skills Can Improve Relationships Early Marital Disillusionment Predicts Later Divorce Predicting Successful Relationships: Attachment Security Betrayal is probably the most devastating loss a person can experience. To be betrayed, the person must first experiencetrust in the betrayer. It is fairly impossible for you to be betrayed if you did not trust the individual in the first place. Therefore, the definition of betrayal involves the act of someone violating your trust in them. The betrayal I am discussing in this article refers to a variety of forms of betrayal. For instance, a child is betrayed when he or she is abused by the parents who are supposed to love, support, and protect the child. A spouse is betrayed when their partner has an affair. Betrayal is when someone you trust lies to you, cheats on you, abuses you, or hurts you by putting their own self-interest first. Read more... Breaking Up is Hard to Do: Ending a Bad Relationship Frequently over the years of my practice I've had new clients who recently left bad relationships and want to prevent a recurrence of the same scenario. However, two common obstacles too often occur, both of which are related to difficulty handling grief and loss. The first obstacle is related to finalizing the relationship. Often, although the relationship is over, there is a period of returning to the former partner and leaving the relationship again and again until they are finally convinced that the partner won't change. The second obstacle is when meeting a new person and seeing the "red flags" they are in denial of the message of those red flags. They ignore the warning signals due to a desperate need to be in a relationship. More important to them is the need to be wanted that the need to be in a healthy relationship. How Are These Obstacles Related to Problems in the Grief Process? As I see it, both of these situations are due to an avoidance of the pain of grief. Grief feels horrible! It is NOT something anyone WANTS to experience. However, it is a necessary process for healing, learning, and making better choices in life. The avoidance of the pain of grief thwarts this process and interferes with becoming involved in healthier relationships in the future. Emotions contain important information about the world and our experience with it. Paying attention to emotions allows us to process an experience and make better decisions in the future. Avoidance of those emotions prevents us from learning from the event. For instance, what is a "red flag" anyway? Typically, it is an emotional warning system. When a person ignores the emotional warning and creates excuses, this blocks awareness of the message and prevents healthy and accurate decision-making.. Read more... For Women Only: How to Have the Relationship of Your Dreams If women could just change one thing, they would find that they could have almost everything they want in a relationship. Of course, I'm talking about women who are married to the average decent non-abusive man. I don't know how often I've heard a woman say, "But I shouldn't have to ask." Frequently, they have all sorts of expectations of their partner and become resentful and angry when he doesn't fulfill those expectations. However, when I ask what he said when they asked for what they wanted, they either respond with "I shouldn't have to ask" or with "I told him once. I shouldn't have to keep telling him." These attitudes are self-defeating and often destructive to a relationship. If women could learn to ask for what they want and ask often, many women could have the relationship of their dreams. When I tell women this, then they typically respond, "But he'll think I'm nagging him." The problem with this thinking is that women don't understand how men communicate. Men are usually very direct in their communication. When they talk with one another they say exactly what they want. A man would say to a friend, "I'm going to be near your office today. Let's meet for lunch." A woman is more likely to say especially when talking to a man," I have an appointment near your office today," hoping that the man will get the hint and suggest lunch. This may be a reasonable approach if the woman doesn't know the man very well and wants to test his interest without making a full commitment. However, the problem is women use the same approach with their husbands! "But I shouldn't have to ask." Read more... Frequently, I am asked how to handle irrational jealous feelings. Usually, the individual recognizes that her feelings are unreasonable with no valid evidence but feels incapable of controlling the jealousy. In addition, the person usually recognizes the destructive nature of indulging in the feelings and the resulting behavior. Such behavior typically involves excessive questioning of her spouse, suspiciousness, and accusations. Many spouses become extremely frustrated with this behavior because they have no way of proving their faithfulness. This leads to an escalating cycle of anger which is used as further evidence by the jealous spouse that her suspicions are correct. The jealous spouse often desperately wants to stop the behavior but finds that he can't control the thoughts which makes him feel miserable. He believes that if he can just prove his suspicions one way or another, he will feel better. The unfortunate fallacy in this thinking, is that trust can never be proven; it can only be disproved. The definition of trust is the belief that something is true. Therefore, without evidence to the contrary, if we want a satisfying relationship, we have to choose to trust the person we love. Read more... As a child Cynthia's hyperactive behavior often annoyed others. Her teachers frequently reprimanded her in school. The other students called her "stupid" and refused to let her join them in activities. At home, her father criticized her and beat her with a belt whenever her parents received a negative report from school. Due to depression, her mother tended to ignore Cynthia's needs for emotional support and attention. As a result, she grew up expecting rejection from others. It seemed that no matter how hard she tried, all she experienced was rejection. As an adult she had numerous unsuccessful relationships. She desperately wanted the acceptance to be found in a relationship; however, she perceived her partner's behavior negatively often thinking about how he wasn't as committed to the relationship and that she was just good enough until someone else came along. These thoughts led to hostility toward him and accusations "You don't care about me!" Due to her focus on her worries about losing him she did not focus on his needs and provide him with emotional support. Her partner tried to reassure her and comfort her at first but the constant negativity and hostility drained his ability to respond to her needs. Read more... I had some good questions on my website regarding handling a partner's irrational jealousy. The reason I wrote the article What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage for the individual with the problem jealousy is because until that person decides to make changes nothing can be done to eliminate their jealousy. That article has been very popular and many people have indicated to me that they are trying to change their behavior after reading it. However, there are many other people who are not recognizing their jealous behavior and so their partners are writing to me asking what to do. Just because the person with the jealousy problem is the only one who can change it doesn't mean that there is nothing that you, as the partner, can do about your partner's jealousy. However, the steps you can take may be very challenging and don't come without risk. If you truly want a chance for your partner to change, the best place to start is with yourself. By changing how you respond to your partner's jealousy you will develop a greater understanding of how difficult it is to make changes. This increases your empathy for your partner especially if he/she is trying to make changes. However, it may also make you less tolerant of someone refusing to recognize their problem or do anything about it. This could be a healthy thing for you because you are less likely to remain in a destructive relationship. Read more... An internet reader, "Mike," wrote about a jealousy situation that he has begun to recognize but that has already caused extensive damage to his relationship: "Now, my spouse is hiding everything and refuses to discuss the topic. My gut feeling is that my spouse is out to get revenge, lying and is maybe now really cheating." He indicates that his wife has informed him she has the right to hide the cell phone bills, change e-mail passwords, and erase internet history because of his past behavior. He states,"I tried to explain what is causing my jealousy, yet I feel I'm not being heard or understood. Now, I feel like the one being "abused" because my spouse acts hostile to me and defensive whenever this subject...is brought up." Frequently, I see this scenario all too often in my practice. By the time the jealous spouse recognizes his/her problem considerable damage to the relationship has already occurred. Attempts to change mean not only resolving the jealousy problems but also healing the relationship. To understand the damage to the relationship, try taking the other person's perspective: Imagine day after day being questioned about your whereabouts, your behavior, and accused of being unfaithful or being attracted to someone else. Imagine someone checking your cell phone records, checking your e-mail, and/or calling you frequently under the pretense of something else but really just wanting to know what you're doing. Imagine your helplessness because no matter how much you reassure your spouse, no matter how many questions you answer, no matter how open you are with your daily itinerary or your e-mail, you can never "prove" your love or faithfulness. Imagine waiting for the next accusation, the next argument, knowing that it will occur but not knowing when. For some, imagine being fearful of physical violence because you can't reassure your spouse enough. Imagine the hopelessness, the hurt, and the pain beginning to turn to anger and resentment. Imagine what this does to love. Read more.. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Wellness Too often, mental health professionals focus on treating illness rather than maintaining wellness. However, the skills we bring to the treatment of psychological disorders are the same skills that can aid people with enhancing wellness. More importantly, the focus on wellness can prevent the life disruption caused by illness and the need for further treatment. What does it mean to focus on wellness? Basically, it means life style enhancements that protects the individual's physical well-being and improves the ability to cope with stressors. Frequently, these are simple techniques that most people just don't take the time to include in their lives. How many times have you said or heard others say, "I don't have time to exercise" or "I don't have time to relax?" Thus, a very important contributor to wellness is attitude: a thought process that influences the way a person approaches dealing with life. READ MORE... Wellness is not only a state of physical health, it is also a state of mind. The mind and body are completely integrated. The mind and body cannot be separated into "This is a physical illness" and "This is a mental illness," although we do just that in our classification schemes. Research has shown more and more that mental illness often has a physical component, and that many physical illnesses can be addressed, at least partially, through behavioral means. Let's look at this through logical analysis. We use medications for many different kinds of problems: to relieve pain, to reduce depression and/or anxiety, to lower blood pressure, to reduce cholesterol, to fight infections, etc. Have you ever wondered why medications work? In the simplest terms possible, medications primarily work because they either mimic or stimulate natural processes. We are chemical beings. Everything that we do, that we think, is through chemical processes. Therefore, when we use medications, we are aiding a natural bodily process. READ MORE... The hardest thing about dieting is the deprivation. It feels like we are being punished. No wonder so many people are unsuccessful with dieting if it has such a strong negative reaction. We aren't motivated by negativity except to move away from it. We are motivation to move towards things that feel good. Therefore, the secret to losing weight has to be in making it feel good. "How can I do that?" you ask because you associate the words "diet" and "bad." I don't have any miracle or new strategies to weight loss. What I am presenting in this article are the old tried and true techniques that have been shown through behavioral research to be effective. However, the title is true. You can lose weight without deprivation if you change some basic ineffective thought processes and behaviors. READ MORE... "I don't have any willpower." "I'm weak." "I'm lazy." "I can't do it." Not long ago I conducted a little experiment with my cardio-kickboxing class. After an intense class I told them to get the heaviest weights they could curl 8-10 times. I spent a minute telling them to focus on feeling tired, that they had just worked out hard and they couldn't do anymore. Then, they were to curl the weights to exhaustion where they just couldn't lift anymore. Once they finished, I spent another minute telling them to focus on having energy, feeling good, feeling refreshed, and knowing they could do more. Once again, they lifted the weights to exhaustion. The results were that out of nine people, only one did fewer lifts the second time! And typically, when someone lifts weights to exhaustion they should not be able to lift as much the second time when it is only a minute later. Although this was not a scientific experiment, it was a demonstration to my class to show how powerful our thinking can be. What this exercise showed was how positive thinking overcame the natural exhaustion of the body and created a self-fulfilling prophecy of lifting more weight because the participants believed that they could. How does this demonstration apply to achieving a healthy weight. Take a moment and write down or reflect upon all the thoughts that come to mind when you think about dieting or losing weight. Now note how many of those thoughts are negative. READ MORE... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen When you are in a state of mindfulness you are actually more aware and able to engage in tasks... Tweet When I ask clients what they do for daily relaxation I usually get responses such as: "I relax by watching TV every night." "I have a glass of wine." "I read a book." "I go out with friends." "I go to the gym and work out." "I find gardening relaxing." "I like to fish." Although each of these activities may be perceived as relaxing and may even have an element of mindfulness, they don't provide the brain and body with the deep meditative relaxation we require. In fact, most of these activities are stimulating to the brain or the body. What is Deep Meditative Relaxation? When I refer to deep meditative relaxation, I mean the type that allows our brain to enter an "alpha" state for a period of time. An "alpha" state refers to our brain waves as measured by an EEG. When (non-invasive) electrodes are attached to our heads to measure our brain waves, we find several different types occur depending upon our degree of wakefulness. The normal state of wakefulness in which we are fully aware and active is shown as "beta" waves. Beta waves on the EEG are very active, not very uniform, and not deep are slow. This makes sense as it is showing that the brain is active which includes thinking as well as physical activity which the brain must direct. So, most of the statements above can be described by a "beta wave state." When we fall asleep our brain slows down, and the brain waves become deeper, slower, and more rhythmic as we progress through the deeper stages of sleep including theta and delta brain waves. However, when we cycle back into dream sleep or "REM" sleep then our brain approaches the wakeful state of the beta waves because our brain is active during dream sleep. For most people who don't practice deep meditative relaxation, these are the primary brain waves that they experience. However, with deep relaxation, meditation, hypnosis, and mindfulness people experience the alpha brain wave state as well as the theta brain wave state (Chiesa, 2009; Lagopoulos et al, 2009) which have been shown to have significant health benefits. What Are the Health Benefits of Deep Meditative Relaxation? 1) Reduction in Stress and Anxiety. Numerous studies have shown that relaxation exercises reduce stress effects and anxiety (Manzoni et al, 2008; Arias, 2006). As a result, individuals can function better in their daily tasks, can be more focused and productive at work, and generally feel more content. 2) Reduces Depression and Substance Abuse. Routine meditation can reduce depressive symptoms (Arias, 2006). In addition, Chiesa and Serretti (2009) conducted a review of studies examining mindfulness meditations and found that such practice reduces relapses in depression as well as substance abuse. Mindfulness may not be the only form of treatment but it can certainly be a useful adjunct to the treatment of these problems. 3) Reduces Symptoms of Various Physical Illnesses. A review of several studies showed that the cognitive impairment related to cancer has been reduced through meditation which also assisted cancer patients with mood, stress, nausea, pain, and sleep disturbance (Biegler, Chaoul & Cohen, 2009). In addition, meditation has been effective with reducing blood pressure (Chiesa & Serretti, 2009) and with epilepsy, premenstrual syndrome (PMS), menopausal symptoms, and autoimmune illnesses (Arias et al, 206). 4) Improves Cognitive Performance. The regular practice of meditation has been shown to improve cognitive flexibility and attention which contributes to overall mental balance and well-being (Moore & Malinowski, 2009). 5) Reduces Pain Sensitivity. Regular meditators have been found to be significantly less sensitive to pain (Grant & Rainville, 2009). Hypnosis, another meditative that stimulates the alpha and theta brain waves has long been shown to be effective for pain management (Stoelb et al, 2009). 6) Slows Cellular Aging? A very interesting proposal by Epel et al (2009) links the practice of mindfulness to a slowing of cellular aging due to the reduction in cognitive stress and stress arousal. In particular, they question that the reduction in stress arousal may be associated with telomere length which are the protective caps at the end of chromosomes that tend to deteriorate with age. However, these are studies that are still being conducted and we will need to stay apprised of the future outcomes. How Do I Do Deep Meditative Relaxation? There are numerous methods that can help individuals achieve the same outcome. Below are several common methods and ways that you can begin your practice. 1) Deep Relaxation. The best way learn deep relaxation is to listen to a recorded exercise. You may listen to a variety of free audio exercises from Excel At Life to begin your practice. The exercises are vary in length and all you need to do is find a comfortable place to sit or lie down and follow the instructions. When you are first learning deep relaxation, a common error is to try too hard to relax which leads to increased tension rather than relaxation. So, don't try to relax but just listen to the exercise. Don't worry if your mind wandersjust allow yourself to refocus on the exercise. Over time, the more you practice the relaxation, the better you will be able to experience the deep relaxation. If you should find yourself becoming bored with the same exercise, you can vary the imagery by just allowing yourself to create your own imagery. For instance, if you listen to the Meadow Relaxation or the Mountain Cabin Relaxation on this site, the imagery describes seeing two doors at the bottom of the staircase and you walk through one door and find yourself in a meadow in one exercise or in a mountain cabin in the other exercise. Many people ask me what's behind the second door. The answer is that I don't know because the second door is there if you want to go through it and create your own pleasant scene. 2) Mindfulness Practice. The best way to describe mindfulness is when the brain is focused on the immediate experience rather than on distracting thoughts that are either irrelevant such as What am I cooking for dinner tonight? or may be future-oriented worries such as What if I blow it in the presentation tomorrow? or past-oriented critiques such as That was stupid. Why did I say that? In fact, mindfulness takes us away from these types of demands or criticisms. The present-oriented focus tends to be more attractive to the brain even if the present moment isn't particularly pleasant. Therefore, as we practice mindfulness the brain will choose to be in the state of mindfulness more frequently. For example, if I'm running late in the morning I can try to speed up my morning routine and focus on demanding thoughts I'm late! I've got to hurry!. However, I've found that this approach not only doesn't seem to make me any faster, but it stresses me and is likely to slow me down because the lack of focus causes me to misplace things or drop things and I end up spinning in circles. However, a mindful approach is to acknowledge the demanding thoughts without getting caught up in them. Instead, I can tell myself Just focus on what you're doing. Don't worry about the time. As a result, I'm less stressed and probably got ready as quickly as I was able. Most of us experience the state of mindfulness naturally at times. For instance, if you've ever watched a beautiful sunset for 10-15 minutes and noticed the changing colors and felt connected to the world around you without distracting thoughts, you were probably in a mindful state. Or, for some people, they may find themselves being very focused or mindful when engaged in certain types of work or activities. In fact, in sports, when they describe being in the zone they are referring to a mindful state in which the athlete is focused only on the activity itself and responds automatically. So if we can experience this state naturally, why is it important to cultivate mindfulness through practice. The first reason is that many people do not experience enough mindfulness in their day to make a difference. The second reason is that for those who do experience plenty of mindfulness, the mindfulness may be contained in such a way that it's not useful to them throughout the day. What I mean is someone who may be mindful while fishing but as soon as they are away from the lake, they become agitated and irritable with others because they don't take the mindfulness state with them. Therefore, the practice of mindfulness allows us to experience mindfulness throughout our daily routine and can be especially important during tasks that we may dislike. For instance, I've never liked doing dishes and would usually be thinking about how much I hated doing dishes and being rushed so I could get away from them which made the experience more unpleasant. One day I found myself spontaneously in a mindful state while doing dishes. I was focused on the act of wiping the dishes, feeling the water run over my hands, and the movement of my muscles has I lifted each plate. At the end I thought Wow, that was really pleasant. This was before I had ever learned about mindfulness as a practice, but I discovered that my mental state had more impact upon my experience than the actual task that I needed to do. A simple method I like to use to help people get started with mindfulness practice is to tell yourself For the next couple of minutes I'm going to focus on being mindful. The nice thing about this exercise is that you can do it anytime, anywhere so the common excuse of I don't have time to relax isn't applicable. When you are in a state of mindfulness you are actually more aware and able to engage in tasks so you can do this while driving, while having a conversation, while waiting in line, while working, or anything else you do in the course of your day. All you do is take a couple of minutes and focus completely on your immediate experience, what you see, hear, taste, smell, or feel. The reason I tell people to start with a couple minutes is because the practice of mindfulness can be quite difficult at first. Within 5-10 seconds of starting the exercise you are likely to be distracted by your usual future-oriented demands/ worries or your past-oriented critiques. That's okay. In fact, that's even desired because it gives you the opportunity to practice the second (and I think, the most important) part of mindfulness which is learning how to acknowledge your thoughts but refocus on your immediate experience. It's sort of saying to yourself although you don't have to actually use words, That's okay, but right now I'm focusing on this. Initially, you may have to do that many times during a two minute practice. That's okay and normal. Try not to get frustrated because frustration interferes with mindfulness since you are now thinking of you frustration rather than the object of your focus. Instead, very gently refocus your mind. Although you only do this for a couple of minutes at a time, I encourage people to practice the technique many times throughout the day. The more you practice, the more your brain will become receptive and accustomed to mindfulness and you will notice your brain returning to a mindful state on its own. Therefore, the idea is not about achieving mindfulness, but just practicing it and then letting your brain do the rest on its own. Excel At Life provides mindfulness training audios. The audios will help you understand mindfulness and how start your practice. 3) Qi Gong. I have found that many people do well with a more active form of relaxation. The ancient Chinese practice of Tai Chi assists people in achieving a deep state of relaxation through movement combined with breathing and focus. However, it takes many years for people to become sufficiently skilled at Tai Chi to begin to obtain benefits. Therefore, I encourage beginners to practice Qi Gong (many different spellings: Qi Chong, Qigong, Chi Kung) which is using simple Tai Chi movements to enter a state of deep relaxation. You may watch examples of these movements and then practice each day or you may follow along with the instructions for a deep meditative Qi Gong exercise that I present on this site. Do I Have to Practice Everyday? To obtain the most benefit from deep meditative relaxation daily practice is ideal. However, any practice that you do will benefit you. I often recommend that people do some of all the different styles of relaxation, especially at first, to find what works best for you and what fits best into your lifestyle. The nice thing about these methods is that you obtain immediate rewards in the form of relaxation, calmness, a sense of well-being. However, the long-term rewards of practice as described above are even more beneficial. Arias, A.J., Steinberg, K., Banga, A., Trestman, R.L. (2006). Systematic review of the efficacy of meditation techniques as treatments for medical illness. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicince, 12, 817-32. Biegler, K.A., Chaoul, M.A., Cohen, L. (2009). Cancer, cognitive impairment, and meditation. Acta Oncologica, 48, 18-26. Chiesa, A. (2009), Zen meditation: an integration of current evidence. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicince, 15, 585-92. Chiesa, A., Serretti, A. (2009). A systematic review of neurobiological and clinical features of mindfulness meditations. Psychological Medicince, 27, 1-14. Epel, E., Daubenmier, J., Moskowitz, J.T., Folkman, S., Blackburn, E. (2009). Can meditation slow rate of cellular aging? Cognitive stress, mindfulness, and telomeres. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1172, 34-53. Grant, J.A., Rainville, P. (2009). Pain sensitivity and analgesic effects of mindful states in Zen meditators: a cross-sectional study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 71, 106-14. Lagopoulos, J., Xu, J., Rasmussen, I., Vik, A., Malhi, G.S., Eliassen, C.F., Arntsen, I.E., Saether, J.G., Hollup, S., Holen, A., Davanger, S., Ellingsen, O. (2009). Increased theta and alpha EEG activity during nondirective meditation. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 11, 1187-92. Manzoni, G.M., Pagnini, F., Castelnuovo, G., Molinari, E. (2008). Relaxation training for anxiety: a ten-years systematic review with meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 2, 8-41. Moore, A., Malinowski, P. (2009). Meditation, mindfulness and cognitive flexibility. Conscious Cognition, 18, 176-86. Stoelb, B.L., Molton, I.R., Jensen, M.P., & Patterson, D.R. (2009). The efficacy of hypnotic analgesia in adults: a review of the literature. Contemporary Hypnosis, 26, 24-39. Copyright 2010 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Listen Free to SportPsych Audios Sport Motivation Intensity Training Energizing the Body and Mind Day on the Farm Mindfulness Sport Imagery Exercise Sport Motivation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Intensity Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Energizing the Body and Mind If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Day On the Farm Mindfulness If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Day On the Farm Mindfulness with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Sport Imagery Exercise If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Sport Motivation Audio sport motivation exercise focused on fear of failure and demand thinking by changing self-talk. The purpose is to focus on pursuing excellence in the area of sports without the demands that tend to interfere with success. (see article: Excellence vs. Perfection). The idea of this exercise is to listen to it frequently so as to increase the repetition of rational motivational self-talk. The more you listen to it, the more you will start to use the thinking presented. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise does not need complete relaxation in order to benefit. You may find that you can listen to it while taking a walk or doing dishes or some other activity that doesn't require your complete focus. Do not use while operating a vehicle or during other activities that require your full attention! Listen Intensity Training Audio exercise focused on learning how to access the emotional state that you require in order to perform at the level you require. In sports, sometimes an athlete requires a high level of intensity such as a defensive football player or a fighter. Othertimes an athlete requires low intensity so as to focus such as a golfer. This audio uses imagery of floating through the different colors of the rainbow and associating each color with a different emotional state such as red associated with strength and power and blue is associated with relaxation and calmness. The more you listen to this audio, the more your brain will associate those colors with the different emotional states. Then, when you need to access a certain emotional state for your sport you can just imagine that color flowing through you bringing the feelings and sensations you want. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Do not use while operating a vehicle or during other activities that require your full attention! Listen Energizing the Body and Mind This ten minute audio focuses on increasing the feeling of energy and strength in the body. This audio has several purposes. It can assist people who tend to have problems with fatigue or low energy. Also, it can aid with a more positive focus regarding the body. This can be an excellent audio for athletes who need to pump up their energy. It can help them focus on feeling the physical strength of their body and prepare them for their sport. Listen Day On the Farm Mindfulness Audio relaxation exercise intended to help achieve mindful awareness of imagery and sensations. The imagery describes a morning on the farm imagining and getting in touch with the sights, sounds, aromas, and tastes. This is a good relaxation exercise for athletes because it teaches you to be aware of everything around you and to be present in the moment. The more you are connected to everything in the present, the more prepared you will be and readily able to respond. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Do not use while operating a vehicle or during other activites that require your full attention! Voice Only Version With Music Version Sport Imagery Exercise Audio sport psychology exercise focused on learning how to visualize your sports performance. The idea is to use mental rehearsal of an accurate technique or performance in order to enhance muscle memory and to improve concentration and focus during your sporting events. In addition, this exercise allows you to be able to practice your sport at times when you can't physically practice. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Do not use while operating a vehicle or during other activities that require your full attention! Listen Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Free Meditation Audios Loving Kindness Meditation Compassion Meditation Pathways Meditation Yogic Breath Training Related reading: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Loving Kindness Meditation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Loving Kindness Meditation with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Compassion Meditation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Compassion Meditation with music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Pathways Meditation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Yogic Breath Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Loving Kindness Meditation Audio meditation using the Buddhist psychology method of Loving Kindness. This method helps you to develop a more positive attitude towards others and towards all things. The positive attitude developed with the use of this meditation will help you to feel better about yourself as well. Although Buddhist psychology uses the meditations from Buddhism, these meditations are not a religious practice but a way of approaching life that creates greater inner peace and contentment. When you listen to a meditation, don't try to force the feelings but just allow yourself to experience it. If other thoughts distract you, just allow yourself to refocus very gently back to the meditation. Over time you will find yourself more able to focus and experience it to greater levels. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Voice only version With music version Compassion Meditation Audio meditation using the Buddhist psychology method of Compassion. The development of compassion increases awareness of others' suffering and cultivates the desire to alleviate this suffering. This method has you imagine the suffering of others and transform it into compassion. The positive attitude developed with the use of this meditation will help you to feel greater compassion towards yourself as well. Although Buddhist psychology uses the meditations from Buddhism, these meditations are not a religious practice but a way of approaching life that creates greater inner peace and contentment. This Compassion meditation is a more advanced technique so it is best to use the Loving Kindness meditation for a period of time prior to using this meditation. When you listen to a meditation, don't try to force the feelings but just allow yourself to experience it. If other thoughts distract you, just allow yourself to refocus very gently back to the meditation. Over time you will find yourself more able to focus and experience it to greater levels. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Voice only version With music version Pathways Meditation Frequently, people are searching for the "perfect" life believing that if they make the right choices life will be pleasant and easy. They may believe that by controlling every aspect of their own life and those they love they can prevent any hardship. However, by focusing on controlling life, they are unable to fully appreciate their own path through life. Or, people may be envious of other people's lives. They may believe that others have better lives or have made better choices. In the process of focusing on others' lives they are unable to see the value in their own life. This audio is to help with viewing your own path through life in a different way. It is meant to be listened to repeatedly as a meditation because you may gain different insights when you listen to it at different times. When you listen to a meditation, don't try to force the feelings but just allow yourself to experience it. If other thoughts distract you, just allow yourself to refocus very gently back to the meditation. Over time you will find yourself more able to focus and experience it to greater levels. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Listen Yogic Breath Training Yogic breath is a meditative type of breathing that is often good to use at the beginning of your daily meditative practice. However, it can also be practiced periodically throughout the day. Although this method is not for immediate anxiety relief, the daily practice of it can help prevent or reduce overall levels of anxiety. Initially, when you begin this practice you may not be able to do it as slowly as it is described. Start with a count that is comfortable for you and eventually you will be able to gradually slow down your breath. The transcript for the audio is below so that you can practice this method in the way that works best for you. TRANSCRIPT Listen Tweet Questions and Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Index to PsychNotes on Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods When Anxiety is Caused by Mindfulness Practice Shouldn't Mindfulness Be Free? May You Have a Mindful New Year! Persistence, Zest for Life, and Mindfulness Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Does Mindfulness Make You Good? No, but Does It Matter? The Time to Relax is When You Don't Have the Time List of Stress Management Methods Stressed About Managing Stress? Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists Mindfulness is Simply Being Without Judgment Mindful Passion Mindfulness: What's in a Name? Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants The Mindful Journey The Benefits of Mindfully Washing Dishes The Difference Between Mindful Focus and a Mindful Attitude Mindfulness Training Shows Promise for Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Mindfulness and Managing Chronic Pain How We Might Stop Bullying: Kindness Curriculum for Preschoolers Practicing Loving-Kindness May Elicit Resentments How Mindfulness Can Reduce Risk for Alzheimer's and Heart Disease Mindful Attention to Unhealthy Foods Improves Food Choices Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong Mindful Dating: How Does Mindfulness Affect Satisfaction in Relationships? 10 Everyday Frustrations and a Mindful Attitude What is the Difference Between Mindful Acceptance and Emotional Suppression? Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder The Paradox of the Mindful Attitude The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Addiction to Emotions and Mindfulness Practice Mindfulness Practice is Not Focusing, It is Re-Focusing How Much Should You Practice Mindfulness? For Fun--Try Being Mindful About the Weather What Could Be More Mindful Than a Cat Watching Bird Videos? Wisdom Doesn't Come In Sound Bites Qigong Can Reduce Depression Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Acceptance as the Basis for Wisdom? I want to feel good NOW! The 20-Minute a Day Miracle Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Being Mindful of Emotions Decreases Intensity Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Mindfulness and Flow in the Workplace Mindfulness May Prevent Relapse Is Mindfulness-Based Therapy Effective? Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood Mindfulness Skills Can Improve Relationships Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen "...happiness doesn't come with fireworks and a parade. Instead, it sneaks in quietly as the night so that you don't realize it has been there for awhile." Tweet The first and most important key to finding happiness may be the most difficult for many people (especially those reading this article): To find happiness you must not seek it! In other words, the more you try to find happiness, the more it will elude you. I think Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864) said it best, Happiness is a butterfly, which when pursued, is always just beyond your grasp, but which, if you will sit down quietly, may alight upon you. However, don't be discouraged. You can do many things to create a life where happiness is more likely to find you. Yet, the same caveat applies: If you do everything for the purpose of finding happiness, you may achieve much, but you are not likely to find happiness. Researcher Mauss and colleagues (2012) who found that the higher the value a person places on being happy, the more likely they are to be unhappy, stated, encouraging a mindset to maximize happiness (as some self-help books do) may be counterproductive. The reason happiness becomes elusive the more you strive for it is due to creating a fixed desire of achieving happiness. If you have read some of my previous articles, you know that a fixed desire is a demand that something has to occur, or be true, or be achieved in order to be happy. Demands, or shoulds, are irrational thinking styles that create conditions for stress and unhappiness. Most of the time these demands take the form of To be happy, I must be thin and wealthy or I must find the love of my dreams or I must have a fulfilling job. In fact, a fixed desire can be almost anything. It could be "I should feel good today" or "My son should get an A on his exam." However, typically the demands are not completely under the control of the individual and/or they are externally focused which means that the individual may not be able to make these things occur even with a great deal of effort. Therefore, this demand attitude allows happiness to be at the whim of the external world. In the case of happiness itself, many people make the attainment of happiness a fixed desire: I must be happy. However, it is only when we realize that we don't need to be happy that we can find happiness. As William Saroyan (1908-1981) said in My Heart's in the Highlands The greatest happiness you can have is knowing that you do not necessarily require happiness. The difference between a fixed desire and a desire or a goal is that the latter doesn't connect personal happiness with the outcome. For instance, a person may desire to find a fulfilling job but doesn't demand that it has to occur. Interestingly, people who have desires rather than demands may be more likely to achieve their goals (Berg, Janoff-Bulman, & Cotter, 2001) possibly because they are more motivated and less discouraged. When the very essence of happiness is dependent upon the achievement of a goal, striving towards that goal can be quite overwhelming and even frightening: What if I fail? The one time I experienced test anxiety was just as I started to take the Graduate Record Exam (GRE) that would affect my entrance into graduate school to become a psychologist. Just before I picked up my pencil, I said to myself, This is the most important test you will ever take. If you don't do well, your life will be ruined. My anxiety shot up as I opened the booklet to read the first question which might as well have been written in Russian because I couldn't comprehend a single word. Fortunately, I knew enough about self-talk and recognized what I had done to myself, so I put my pencil down, did five minutes of deep breathing and told myself, This test doesn't matter. If you fail, all it means is that your life will take a different path. That is the difference between a fixed desire and a desire. The Tao te Ching (also known as The Book of the Way which I think of as early cognitive therapy) states, If you want to be given everything, give everything up. If you reflect on this statement you may realize that to give everything up, you must also give up the desire to be given everything. Very paradoxical and mind-boggling, isn't it? But that is the first step: To find happiness you must not seek it. Similarly, Charles Dickens stated in his novel The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby, Happiness is a gift and the trick is not to expect it, but to delight in it when it comes. However, that being said, let's discuss how to achieve happiness. Actually, how to create the conditions so that happiness can find you. The work to finding happiness is to remove the obstacles to happiness. What Is Happiness? The general definition of happiness is that it is a state of well-being or contentment. In psychology it is defined as positive mood, life satisfaction, and subjective well-being (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005). The subjective aspect of the definition indicates that only the individual can define whether he or she is happyit cannot be defined from an external perspective. Over 2000 years ago, Aristotle proposed that Happiness is the meaning and the purpose of life, the whole aim and end of human existence. Yet, achieving happiness has often been focused on the external such as obtaining the approval of others or accumulating wealth, possessions, or power. As a result we have a fairly good idea of what happiness is not. For instance, beyond having a satisfactory standard of living, wealth does not contribute to happiness (Lyubomirsky, 2001). Zhuangzi, a Chinese philosopher (369-286BC) described the pursuit of happiness in a way eerily similar to what many people today do: I cannot tell if what the world considers happiness is happiness or not. All I know is that when I consider the way they go about attaining it, I see them carried away headlong, grim and obsessed, in the general onrush of the human herd, unable to stop themselves or to change their direction. All the while they claim to be just on the point of attaining happiness. So whether we are talking about today or 2000 years ago, I believe that we have made it fairly clear that happiness isn't attained through wealth or power or achievement. In fact, happiness does not appear to be derived from the pursuit of happiness but is a consequence of pursuing a life of meaning and well-being. With that in mind we will look at what the psychological research has indicated as worthwhile pursuits that can impact a person's overall sense of well-being, satisfaction, and contentment with life and self. First, let's examine the influences on happiness. Is Happiness Possible for Everyone? Generally, the psychological literature has shown that happiness is due to genetics, life circumstances, and intentional behavior (DeNeve & Cooper, 1998) Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005). The bad news is that a significant portion is related to genetics. However, the good news is that a significant portion is related to intentional behavior. 1) Genetics. About 50% of an individual's degree of happiness appears to be due to genetic influences. Such factors include personality traits, negative emotional states, and excitability. The genetic aspect of happiness may not be very changeable, however as Rick Hansen, author of Buddha's Brain: The Practical Neuroscience of Happiness, Love, and Wisdom (2009), indicates, that by being aware of the human tendency towards negativity we are able to take steps to counteract it. Researchers Kristina DeNeve and Harris Cooper (1998) suggested based upon their meta-analysis of 148 studies with over 42,000 participants that the most influential personality traits on happiness in order of importance are: (1) affiliation, (2) perceived control, (3) emotional stability, (4) internal locus of control, (5) social desirability, (6) sociability, and (7) extraversion. However, as you may be aware by examining the list, many of these are interrelated. But there are distinctions. For example, extraversion may suggest a personal style of relating to others whereas affiliation may refer to the overall quality of relationships. Although the idea that genetics can account for 50% of a person's happiness can be discouraging especially if you are low in those personality traits, there are reasons for optimism regarding pursuing happiness and recognizing that genes are not destiny. In particular, researchers have found that CBT interventions and developing certain attitudes can increase happiness. Also, older people are generally happier than younger people indicating some influence that can override genetics. Therefore, it is believed that genetics can have some indirect influence but a person is capable of making choices regarding change (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005). For instance, although excitability may be genetically programmed, the experience of anxiety or agitation can be reduced through certain meditations, relaxation, and cognitive methods. 2) Life Circumstances. Probably the most surprising factor as it relates to happiness is the contribution of life circumstances. Although many philosophers have indicated otherwise, the general belief by the public has been that life circumstances contribute a great deal to happiness and unhappiness. However, research has shown that even major life changes only account for 8 to 15% of a person's happiness (DeNeve & Cooper, 1998, Lyubomirsky, 2001). What this means is that the things that happen to us such as illness, injury, financial troubles, etc. only account for a small part of overall happiness. This is why people who have suffered tragedy can still be happy. 3) Intentional Behavior. Most important to our purposes, however, is that intentional behavior accounts for 40% of an individual's level of happiness. In other words, even an individual with negative life circumstances and poor genetics has potentially a great deal of influence over their sense of satisfaction and well-being in life. However, this doesn't mean that attainment of happiness is easy because there are often obstacles to people engaging in the intentional behaviors that influence happiness. The ingredients of happiness have not changed over time and can be somewhat elusive for people because although they may be simple, they are not necessarily easy: One is happy as a result of one's own efforts once one knows the necessary ingredients of happiness: simple tastes, a certain degree of courage, self denial to a point, love of work, and above all, a clear conscience (Georges Sand, 1804-1876). Intentional behavior is the aspect of happiness that we want to examine more closely. What this means is that there are certain behaviors, lifestyles, and choices that can be made by the individual that can increase the likelihood of happiness but likely involve some work. Let's look at those. What Intentional Behaviors Can Influence Happiness? In examining the research and the general wisdom of philosophers and others, I have categorized the intentional behaviors into seven general types that do have some overlap and may vary in importance for different individuals. The information that comprises the list of intentional behaviors below is from research literature reviews by positive psychology researcher, Dr. Sonja Lyubomirsky and colleagues (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005; Lyubomirsky, 2001) and a meta-analysis by DeNeve & Copper (1998). 1) Sense of Purpose. Commonly people believe that a life of leisure provides happiness. They believe that if they had plenty of money, didn't need to work and could play all day, they would be happy. And yet studies of truly happy people show that they often have a high commitment to goals and a sense of purpose driving their lives. Happy people focus intently upon achieving meaningful goals. This drive and the progress towards these goals often aid in creating more positive daily experiences in life. Thus, it becomes a positive cycle of the pursuit of a sense of purpose creates more positive experiences which provide more reinforcement for pursuing goals. As Franklin D. Roosevelt, the thirty-second president of the U.S., a man who required physical assistance every day of his presidency due to disability from polio and yet lead the U.S. through a very difficult period, stated Happiness lies in the joy of achievement and the thrill of creative effort. 2) Affiliation and Service to Others. Our relationships to others is a strong factor in overall level of happiness. As Epicurus stated over 2000 years ago Of all the means to insure happiness throughout the whole life, by far the most important is the acquisition of friends. However, the way that we affiliate may differ according to personality style. Outgoing individuals may be more interactive with many people, whereas introverted folks may be content with one or two relationships. Some people may find sense of purpose in their service to others whereas others are content with socializing. However, there are some components of relationships that are more likely to contribute to happiness. One is the feeling of kindness and compassion towards others as well as being genuinely pleased for others' success rather than being competitive or jealous. As the Dalai Lama says Only the development of compassion and understanding for others can bring us the tranquility and happiness we all seek. In addition, the ability to trust, love and see oneself as part of a community is conducive to happiness. The more that we see ourselves as entrusted with the happiness of others, the more we receive in return. Happiness is a perfume you cannot pour on others without getting some on yourself (Ralph Waldo Emerson, 1803-1882). 3) Philosophical Perspective. How we frame the world and our experiences within it influence our degree of happiness. Those who tend to be more optimistic about creating positive outcomes are more likely to engage in active problem-solving and to be more content. However, this does not mean being unrealistic in assessing outcomes which can be detrimental (as discussed below in the section on emotional tolerance). Happier people tend to be satisfied with all their options when making a decision. In other words, as discussed at the beginning of the article, they are not attached to any particular outcome. They will strive towards a particular goal but are equally content if they don't achieve it. Remember, as I stated earlier all it means is that your life will take a different path. This philosophical perspective allows the individual to see the value in all experiences without a need to evaluate them negatively. As Euripedes (480-405BC) opined, The man is happiest who lives from day to day and asks no more, garnering the simple goodness of life. Although happiness may not be as simple as developing an "attitude of gratitude," developing a more optimistic perspective and seeing the positive aspect of an event can be helpful. 4) Emotional Tolerance of Suffering. Although emotional tolerance is an area I could write an entire article about (if not a book), I will try to briefly discuss this concept. What I have learned over the course of my career as a clinical psychologist is that most problems are worsened by the inability to tolerate emotions. A couple of areas depict this quite well. The most striking area is grief due to a death or tragedy. I have frequently seen people who contact me in extreme distress due to grief (often the only time they have even seen a therapist) and after I explain to them that their feelings are a normal part of the healing grief process and they should just allow these emotions, they feel much better. So much so that they don't need another appointment. Although they continue to grieve, they are able to tolerate the emotions because they understand them better. Another example that I have seen frequently since I specialize with anxiety disorders is people who have Panic Disorder. A hallmark of their symptoms is the inability to tolerate the feelings of panic. When they can get to an understanding that the feelings won't hurt them, that it is just a feeling that will go away, their panic usually decreases significantly. As I wrote about in Sadness is a State of Happiness, it is not the absence of negative emotions, but the full expression of our emotions that contributes to our happiness. Research has found that denying negative emotions or information threatens happiness (DeNeve & Cooper, 1998). How does this fit with research that shows happier people are more optimistic and have more positive emotions? Interesting research by Maya Tamir and Brett Ford (2012) answer this question by examining the concept of the usefulness of emotions. What they found is that happier people want to feel useful emotions that are appropriate to the situation but they don't want to feel negative emotions when they are not useful. In other words, when it is the time to grieve, happy people grieve; when it is the time to be angry, happy people are angry; but most of the time, happy people are content. Victor Hugo (1802-1885) expressed this idea of tolerating emotions: Happiness lies for those who cry, those who hurt, those who have searched, and those who have tried for only they can appreciate the importance of people who have touched their lives. I believe this research helps to explain other findings that happy people pursue success rather than avoid failure, do not engage in excessive worrying, are less sensitive to social comparison, are able to forgive and are less likely to dwell on moods (Lyubomirsky, 2001). If you think about itall of these things, failure, worrying, social anxiety, inability to forgive and dwelling on moods are not useful. However, happy people are able to feel anger and sadness and anxiety when the immediate situation calls for it. As William Faulker (1897-1962) stated in Absalom, Absalom! If happy I can be I will, if suffer I must I can. 5) Self-Contentment. Research shows that happier people tend to have greater self-confidence and belief in their abilities. They use social comparison in a positive way that tends to be more motivating rather than comparing themselves negatively to others, and so are not threatened by others' success or abilities. In other words, they are comfortable with themselves. This contentment with the self allows them to strive for self-improvement as a means of creating something positive rather than avoiding something negative. As Aristotle (384-322) said, Happiness is the settling of the soul into its most appropriate spot and Erasmus (1466-1536) believed The summit of happiness is reached when a person is ready to be what he is. It can't be emphasized enough that the contentment with the self provides the foundation for happiness to emerge. 6) Choice. Happier people believe not only generally in their ability to control their experience in life but also specifically in their ability to choose to be happy. Happiness is a choice that requires effort at times (Aeschylus, 525-456BC). This desire for control has beneficial effects in their lives. They tend to be more assertive, decisive, and engage in active problem-solving. Such a direct approach tends to increase positive life experiences which, in turn, influences belief in control and degree of happiness. Conversely, it has been found that an external locus of control, a belief that luck, not effort, is a primary factor in what occurs, has been shown to be detrimental to the achievement of happiness ( Lyubomirsky, 2001). Helen Keller, who overcame being born deaf and blind in the 1800s to be the first with her disabilities to earn a Bachelor's degree and become a successful writer and speaker, expressed her belief that Your success and happiness lie in you. She demonstrated this belief every day of her life. 7) Health Behaviors. Finally, researchers DeNeve and Cooper (1998) in their analysis of 148 studies concluded that as important as personality variables are to happiness, health behaviors are of even greater importance. Happier people take care of their physical and mental health needs. As such, they are more likely to exercise, eat nutritiously, and engage in relaxation of some sort. If they need medical care, they are more likely to follow through and take proper care of themselves. One other point about health behaviors is that exercise (and other health behaviors) is a good example of how we need to be able to tolerate discomfort for the benefit we derive. People may not always get immediate reward from these behaviors but they persist due to the long-term benefits. This doesn't mean you can't try to find activity you enjoy (or healthy foods you like)it just means that at times you may not enjoy it, but it is important to take care of your health anyway. How To Choose Which Intentional Behaviors to Pursue? After reading about the intentional behaviors that contribute to happiness you may be feeling a little overwhelmed about what it takes to find happiness. However, keep in mind that you do not need to engage in all the above behaviors for happiness to find you. It is not even clear which are most important as some people find happiness in their sense of purpose in life whereas others might find happiness in their affiliation with others. However, as I said earlier there is overlap among the categories so that people who are highly focused in one area probably have strong influences in other areas as well. VERY IMPORTANT: Do not try to change everything at once! If you try to do that, it indicates that you don't understand the first concept of not overvaluing happiness: To find happiness you must not seek it! Try to make just small changes in your life at a time. To pursue intentional behaviors to increase happiness there are several important issues to consider: person-activity fit, initiating and maintaining effort, and the development of happy habits (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005). 1) Person-Activity Fit. The behaviors that influence happiness may vary from person to person. For instance, an extravert may find affiliation and group relationships as an appealing pursuit whereas an introvert might find a sense of purpose in quieter, more independent activities. What is important is to recognize your strengths and what provides you with a sense of satisfaction rather than trying to fit a mold created by others. For example, I once had a client who had a passion for art but was pushed into the family business and spent her life doing office work. When I asked her why she didn't pursue art, she said her family had convinced her that she could never make a living in that area. However, she always felt that something was missing from her life. Doing something just because you are told you should is not likely to lead to happiness. 2) Initiating and Maintaining Effort. As I stated previously, happiness is simple but it is not easy. To create the conditions for happiness, effort is required. This can be an obstacle for many people especially because they may not receive immediate reward for their efforts. As I see it, the need for immediate gratification is a major problem in our society because it tempts people to focus on short-term rewards rather than long-term gains which are often directly opposed to one another. For example, it may be immediately rewarding to have a piece of chocolate cake, but the weight gain caused by focusing on the short-term reward prevents the long-term reward of being healthier. Or, it may be immediately rewarding to avoid the discomfort of facing a fear but by avoiding the discomfort in the short-term, more pain may be experienced in the long-term. For example, a person who is afraid of failure may avoid developing goals where failure could occur, but in the long-term that person may also prevent success and end up leading a less fulfilling life. Therefore, once you have identified intentional behaviors that are a fit for you, it may be necessary to identify how to incorporate these behaviors into your lifestyle. If you identify any obstacles to doing so, you need to develop a plan to overcome the obstacles so that you can engage routinely in the behaviors that will influence your overall happiness. 3) Development of Habit. Unfortunately it is human nature to adapt or become accustomed to the impact of certain behaviors so that if something feels good the first time, it may not have the same intensity of feeling the second, or especially the hundredth, time. Therefore, it is important to vary how the intentional behaviors are implemented so as not to habituate to the experience (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005). In other words, you want to develop habits that are not so routine that they lose their beneficial impact. How can this be done? I think there are probably many ways but one that I find particularly suitable for this is the development of a mindful attitude. Mindfulness allows us to approach the same circumstances with the perspective of a fresh experience. For instance, you might see a certain tree every day on your morning walk. Without mindfulness you tend to become less and less aware of that tree. However, a mindful approach allows you to become more intimately aware of that tree in all its variations. Not only would you notice the impact of different seasons on the tree, but you might notice how different weather conditions affect the tree such as a dry day or a humid day, or you might notice the micro-environment of the tree such as the insects and birds that live there. A mindful approach provides you with a new experience every day that you engage in the habit of your daily walk. A Final Word About How to Know Happiness When it Finds You Some of you reading this article may have realized by now that you are already happy. As I have described in other articles, that happened to me a number of years ago. When I quit seeking the elusive perfect life, I realized that I was already happy. However, the problem is that happiness doesn't come with fireworks and a parade. Instead, it sneaks in quietly as the night so that you don't realize it has been there for awhile. Aldous Huxley in Brave New World described this quite well: Actual happiness always looks pretty squalid in comparison with the over-compensations for misery. And, of course, stability isn't nearly so spectacular as instability. And being contented has none of the glamour of a good fight against misfortune, none of the picturesqueness of a struggle with temptation, or a fatal overthrow by passion or doubt. Happiness is never grand. We often expect happiness to be similar to the artificial means used to create the illusion of happiness: power, alcohol, drugs, prestige, winning. All these can be quite intense experiences. But true happiness, when it finds you, just sits quietly on your shoulder. References Berg, Michael B., Janoff-Bulman, R., & Cotter, J (2001). Perceiving value in obligations and goals: Wanting to do what should be done. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 982-995. DeNeve, K.M. & Cooper, H. (1998). The happy personality: A meta-analysis of 137 personality traits and subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 197-229. Ford, B.Q. & Tamir, M. (2012). When getting angry is smart: Emotional preferences and emotional intelligence. Emotion, 12, 685-689. Hansen, R. (2009). Buddha's Brain. Lyubomirsky, S. (2001). Why are some people happier than others? The role of cognitive and motivational processes in well-being. American Psychologist, 56, 239-249. Lyubomirsky, S., Sheldon, K., Schkade, D. (2005). Pursuing happiness: The architecture of sustainable change. Review of General Psychology, 9, 111-131. Mauss, I.B., Tamir, M., Anderson, C.L. & Savino, N.S. (2011). Can seeking happiness make people unhappy? Paradoxical effects of valuing happiness. Emotion, 11, 807-815. Tamir, M. & Ford, B.Q. (2012). Should people pursue feelings that feel good or feelings that do good? Emotional preferences and well-being. Emotion, 12, 1061-1070. Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles This site provides a number of resources from mindfulness-based cognitive-behavioral therapy (MCBT) methods to help you cope with life problems and to become the best person you can be. Sometimes this site can be overwhelming because there are so many resources. The following are some general guides to help you start. Then, select the categories that are most relevant to your situation. Resources Which Coping Strategy Should I Use? How Do We Change Irrational Thinking? What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety Did You Know Psychotherapy has Stronger Scientific Evidence than Many Common Medical Procedures? Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? App: CBT Tools for Healthy Living Audios Panic Assistance Mindful Grounding All anxiety assistance audios Articles 50 Tools for Panic and Anxiety How to Manage Panic and Anxiety 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Developing Tolerance of Anxiety All anxiety articles Learn to manage anxiety> Audios Depression Assistance and Education Managing Insomnia Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury Articles I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where Do I Start? Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment All depression articles Take steps to cope with depression> Don't Accept Criticism Without Evaluating the Source How can criticism overload be avoided? One of the best ways to avoid criticism overload is to evaluate it before accepting it. This can be difficult to do because you need to listen to the criticism to evaluate it which can cause distress and affect self-esteem. However, one way to decrease the amount of criticism you absorb is to first evaluate the source of the criticism before even listening to it. Read more... Related: The Purpose of Normal Low Self-Esteem Helping Children Achieve Their Potential Understanding Mindfulness Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Step 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Mindfulness Practice Exercises Create a more mindful life> Managing Stress Audios Stress Education Quick stress relief Relaxation Articles Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help List of Stress Management Methods Learn to handle stress> Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log What triggers my stress? When am I not as depressed? Are my headaches associated with certain places or people? Is my treatment effective? The Mood Log feature of the app not only gives you a place to record your daily moods but it will provide an analysis of how different activities or events can impact your moods. Read more... Passive-Aggressive Behavior Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing With Passive-Aggressive People 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? Methods to deal with passive-aggression> Self-esteem & Self-efficacy Audios Self-Esteem Blackboard All self-esteem improvement audios Articles 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy All self-concept articles Improve self-esteem> Motivation Audios Hot Air Balloon Motivation Sport Motivation All motivational audios Articles Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Motivation: Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Become more motivated> Questionnaires Cognitive Styles Test: Learn about your thinking styles to improve your life Your Happiness Assessment: Discover what interferes with your happiness General Self-efficacy: Your belief in your abilities Self-Esteeem: What is the attitude you have towards yourself? Perceived Control Scale: Assess the degree of control you believe you have Perfectionist or Efficient? Does perfectionism interfere with your life? CES-Depression: Do you have depression? Social Anxiety: Assess your degree of social anxiety List of PsychTests Audios When You Have Been Betrayed Loving Kindness Meditation Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Forgiveness and the Process of Healing Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Audios Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Lies You Were Taught as a Child Distrust of Others and Learning to Discriminate Learning to Tolerate Anxiety Building Blocks Emotion Training Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Articles Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? When Everyone is Traumatized What Happens to Those Who Are Truly Suffering? Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Audios Choosing Happiness Loving Kindness Meditation Compassion Meditation Mindfulness Articles The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions Happiness is An Attitude Why Do People Choose Unhappiness? Questionnaire Your Happiness Assessment Bring happiness into your life> Audios Jealousy Assistance 5 Methods to Managing Anger Mindfulness Training Articles When Is Jealousy Irrational? What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Jealousy: When the Damage is Done What to Do When Your Partner's Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Relationship Rejection Sensitivity, Irrational Jealousy, and Impact on Relationships How to start handling your jealousy> Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Understanding Mindfulness: Free Audio Downloads Understanding Mindfulness: Step 1--Basic Mindfulness Practice Understanding Mindfulness: Step 2--The Mindful Experience of Discomfort Understanding Mindfulness: Step 3--Mindfulness and Unpleasant Emotions Understanding Mindfulness: STEP 4--Mindfulness and Cognitive Restructuring Understanding Mindfulness: STEP 5--Mindfulness and Grief Additional reading: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods Mindfulness Practice Exercises Next Audio Mindfulness Exercise 1: Eating a Piece of Fruit Mindfulness Exercise 2: Eating a Piece of Chocolate Mindfulness Exercise 3: Doing the Dishes Mindfulness Exercise 4: Eating a Crunchy Vegetable Mindfulness Exercise 5: Sitting Mindfulness Exercise 6: An Itch Mindfulness Exercise 7: Stretching Mindfulness Exercise 8: Walking Mindfulness Exercise 9: Feeling the Air Mindfulness Exercise 10: Engaged in Conversation Mindfulness Exercise 11: Reading a Book Mindfulness Exercise 12: Closing Your Eyes Mindfulness Exercise 13: Listening Mindfulness Exercise 14: Feeling Heat Mindfulness Exercise 15: Feeling Cold Mindfulness Exercise 16: Doing an Unpleasant Chore Mindfulness Exercise 17: Touching a Door Knob Mindfulness Exercise 18: Getting Dressed Mindfulness Exercise 19: Experiencing Rain Mindfulness Exercise 20: Experiencing a Neutral Object Mindfulness Exercise 21: Digging in the Garden Mindfulness Exercise 22: Walking Up Stairs Mindfulness Exercise 23: Lifting Weights Mindfulness Exercise 24: Lying Down Mindfulness Exercise 25: Drifting to Sleep Mindfulness Exercise 26: Exercise to Exhaustion Mindfulness Exercise 27: Feeling Bored Mindfulness Exercise 28: Feeling Excitement Mindfulness Exercise 29: Feeling Loneliness Mindfulness Exercise 30: Feeling Disappointment Mindfulness Exercise 31: Feeling Embarrassed Mindfulness Exercise 32: Feeling Frustrated Mindfulness Exercise 33: Feeling Sadness Mindfulness Exercise 34: Feeling Helpless Mindfulness Exercise 35: Feeling Remorse Mindfulness Exercise 36: Feeling Apprehension Index to PsychNotes on Mindfulness and Relaxation Methods When Anxiety is Caused by Mindfulness Practice Shouldn't Mindfulness Be Free? May You Have a Mindful New Year! Persistence, Zest for Life, and Mindfulness Treating Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing Mindfulness Training and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Does Mindfulness Make You Good? No, but Does It Matter? The Time to Relax is When You Don't Have the Time List of Stress Management Methods Stressed About Managing Stress? Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists Mindfulness is Simply Being Without Judgment Mindful Passion Mindfulness: What's in a Name? Mindfulness Practice and Relapse Prevention When Using Anti-depressants The Mindful Journey The Benefits of Mindfully Washing Dishes The Difference Between Mindful Focus and a Mindful Attitude Mindfulness Training Shows Promise for Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Mindfulness and Managing Chronic Pain How We Might Stop Bullying: Kindness Curriculum for Preschoolers Practicing Loving-Kindness May Elicit Resentments How Mindfulness Can Reduce Risk for Alzheimer's and Heart Disease Mindful Attention to Unhealthy Foods Improves Food Choices Want an Easy and Uplifting Health Practice? Laughing Qigong Mindful Dating: How Does Mindfulness Affect Satisfaction in Relationships? 10 Everyday Frustrations and a Mindful Attitude What is the Difference Between Mindful Acceptance and Emotional Suppression? Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder The Paradox of the Mindful Attitude The Key to Mindful Breathing for Sleep Addiction to Emotions and Mindfulness Practice Mindfulness Practice is Not Focusing, It is Re-Focusing How Much Should You Practice Mindfulness? For Fun--Try Being Mindful About the Weather What Could Be More Mindful Than a Cat Watching Bird Videos? Wisdom Doesn't Come In Sound Bites Qigong Can Reduce Depression Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Acceptance as the Basis for Wisdom? I want to feel good NOW! The 20-Minute a Day Miracle Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Being Mindful of Emotions Decreases Intensity Massage: Effects on Anxiety, Depression, and Pain Mindfulness and Flow in the Workplace Mindfulness May Prevent Relapse Is Mindfulness-Based Therapy Effective? Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood Mindfulness Skills Can Improve Relationships Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Introduction to Qi Gong by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Qi Gong Circle Hands Up by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Qi Gong Circle Hands in Front by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Qi Gong Sitting Meditation Part 1 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Qi Gong Sitting Meditation Part 2 by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Qi Gong Playlist--25 Minute Meditation by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles MARITAL DISILLUSIONMENT QUESTIONNAIRE The following questionnaire is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. As with many research questionnaires, this questionnaire may not be normed for online participants. Please take this into account when you receive the results. This questionnaire assesses your feelings about your marriage particularly whether you have become disillusioned with it which indicates dissatisfaction and losing faith or trust in your marriage. Below are sixteen statements that you may agree or disagree with. Using the 1 - 7 scale, indicate your agreement with each item . Please be open and honest in your responses. No login required to obtain results. Item 1: I am very disappointed in my marriage. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 2: I am very disappointed in my spouse. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 3: My partner used to be my best friend, but now I often dont like her/him as a person. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 4: Marriage is not at all what I had expected it to be; I feel very disappointed and bitter. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 5: Before we were married I thought that I was lucky to be with someone like my partner, now, I am no longer sure that I am so lucky. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 6: I used to love spending time with my spouse, but then it started to feel like a chore. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 7: I feel tricked, cheated, or deceived by love. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 8: Marriage is not as enjoyable as I had expected it to be. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 9: If I could go back in time, I would not marry my spouse again. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 10: Before we got married, my spouse put his/her best foot forward; later he/she no longer bothered. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 11: My marriage is no longer as important to me as it used to be. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 12: Marriage used to be a sacred bond; now it is just a legal document. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 13: My partner seems to be an entirely different person now. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 14: Before we got married, I wanted to be a better person around my partner; once we were married, my spouse no longer inspired me to improve. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 15: I no longer know what makes for a happy marriage. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree Item 16: I have given up on my marriage. Strongly Disagree Disagree Slightly Disagree Neither Agree nor Disagree Slightly Agree Agree Strongly Agree No login required to obtain results. For authors and more information: Niehuis, S. and Bartell, D. (2006). The marital disillusionment scale: development and psychometric properties. North American Journal of Psychology, 8, 69-83. Niehuis, S. (2007). Convergent and discriminant validity of the Marital Disillusionment Scale. Psychological Reports, 100, 203-207. RECOMMENDED BOOKS... Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Motivational Audios Hot Air Balloon Motivation Finding Your Path Decision-Making Risk and Planning for Success Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight Sport Motivation Hot Air Balloon Motivation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $.99 for a download helps with creating more audios. Streaming is free but support is appreciated! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Finding Your Path Decision-Making If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Risk and Planning for Success If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Sport Motivation If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Hot Air Balloon Motivation Although this audio uses imagery for relaxation and can be used just for the calming experience, the focus of the audio is encouragement and motivation. Once you achieve a state of relaxation, listening to the motivational statements can increase your self-confidence and belief in your ability to achieve your goals. This audio is meant to be listened to repeatedly to help increase your positive self-talk regarding achieving your goals. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise is best the more fully relaxed you are. If you are unable to relax completely, listen to the relaxation exercises such as the meadow or mountain cabin until you are more skilled with relaxation. Do not use while operating a car! TRANSCRIPT Listen Finding Your Path Decision-Making This audio uses the imagery of choosing a path through the woods to guide through the process of decision-making. It confronts the common misconception that a perfect path exists and that only by choosing the "right" path success will be achieved. Instead, it focuses on the idea that all paths have valuable lessons to learn. As you listen to this audio over time you can change the thinking that can prevent you from making decisions and being successful. Not choosing a path to pursue may be the most destructive choice of all. Listen Risk and Planning for Success This audio discusses obstacles to success. In particular, it addresses the fear of risk and how it limits the achievement of goals. It examines ways of thinking about risk that can interfere with success and points out the importance of planning to create a calculated risk that is more likely to lead to success. It is best to listen to this audio repeatedly until it becomes a natural way of thinking for you. The way thinking can be changed is through repetition--the more you listen to it, the more it helps you to change your thinking. You can develop a different attitude about risk by recognizing how the fear of risk and/or failure prevents you from achieving what you want. About 8 minutes. TRANSCRIPT Listen Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight This audio teaches you about how to think about your body and weight in a different way. Instead of thinking of weight loss in perfectionistic terms that lead to a cycle of dieting and failure, you can learn to think about caring for your body and setting manageable healthy goals. The audio is meant to be listened to repeatedly so that the thinking style can become more automatic. About 13 minutes. TRANSCRIPT Also, read article: Thinking Your Way to a Healthy Weight. Listen Sport Motivation Audio sport motivation exercise focused on fear of failure and demand thinking by changing self-talk. The purpose is to focus on pursuing excellence in the area of sports without the expectations that tend to interfere with success. (see article: Excellence vs. Perfection). The idea of this exercise is to listen to it frequently so as to increase the repetition of rational motivational self-talk. The more you listen to it, the more you will start to use the thinking presented. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. This exercise does not need complete relaxation in order to benefit. You may find that you can listen to it while taking a walk or doing dishes or some other activity that doesn't require your complete focus. Do not use while operating a vehicle or during other activities that require your full attention! Listen Performance, Success and Goal Attainment Will-power or Strategy? How to Practice Like an Expert Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Setting Goals Isn't Enough for Success Exploring Possibilities for Identity Achievement Life is Like...Planning a New Vegetable Garden Improving Performance by Mindfully Reducing Self-interruptions Mindfulness and "To Do" Lists What Are Reasonable Goals? Helping Children Achieve Their Potential How to Succeed at Goals (or Why Goals Fail) Efficiency: Determining the Difference Between Perfectionism and Striving for Excellence Do We Really WANT to Educate Our Children? Do You Want an Education or Do You Want a Grade? Why Do You Have Trouble Delaying Gratification? What is an Achievable Goal? Why Set Goals If 50% of New Year's Resolutions are Broken by Three Months? What Determines the Success of New Year's Resolutions? Choose Your Own Dream: Don't Pursue What You Should Demands vs. Mindfulness for Enhancing Performance Listening to Your Heart Helps Moral Decision-Making: But is it Good for Fear Avoidance Decisions? Be the Best You Can Be: On Mindfulness and Performance Improving Attention and Quality of Effort How Both Overly Positive and Negative Misperceptions of Performance Can Affect You Are People Who Set More Extreme Goals At Risk for Depression or Mania? Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles I'm Depressed. I'm Overwhelmed. Where Do I Start? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "So, where do you start? Anywhere. Just make it simple. And begin." Tweet Although cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is the most effective treatment for depression, it can add to the already present feeling of being overwhelmed because it involves effort. Many people with depression think "What do you not get about 'I can't do anything!'?" when the therapist presents them with CBT treatment methods for depression. A common symptom of clinical depression is fatigue with the associated feature of lack of interest in normal activities. The individual with depression can feel overwhelmed with the simplest of tasks. Eating, brushing teeth, or showering can present major daily hurdles. The idea of the effort required by CBT can be daunting. Which is why it is best to have a CBT specialist develop a plan. The therapist can assist by creating manageable steps and by using sessions for training exercises on using the methods of CBT. A CBT specialist provides specific tools and techniques to change thinking and behavior. The Difference Between A CBT Specialist and a Therapist Who Claims to do CBT 1) CBT is not talk therapy. CBT involves learning how to use methods to reduce anxiety and depression that you can then implement yourself. Although talking about your problems does occur during the sessions, the focus is on "doing." CBT is directive and helps you to develop ways of managing your symptoms. 2) CBT doesn't just tell you how to think. Some clients have reported to me that they previously saw a CBT therapist and that it didn't help. Upon further inquiry, I found that the therapist just told them how they "should" think. However, CBT is much more than telling someone how or what to think. CBT involves learning how to recognize irrational thinking patterns, understanding why these thoughts are irrational, and developing a believable rational alternative. The therapist may need to devote a great deal of time, especially if the client is severely depressed, to teaching each of these steps. Learning how to develop a believable challenge is particularly crucial because it has to be something the individual can accept. Instead of telling someone what they "should" think, a CBT specialist provides them with possible alternatives and the logic behind these alternative rationales. Then they discuss whether it is an acceptable explanation or not. What may be acceptable to the therapist may not be a believable challenge for the client so the therapist needs to listen carefully to the client and develop an explanation that can work specifically for that client. 3) CBT provides training. A CBT specialist will help you learn the methods by determining what training you need and developing a plan for that training. For example, if I provide relaxation audios to a client, I will follow-up the next session to determine how the relaxation audio helped. If I find that it did not help, I determine the specific obstacles and address those obstacles. For some people with severe depression or anxiety, I may need to provide in-office relaxation training until they are able to use the audios. The same is true with the cognitive methods. If someone has difficulty with the reading materials, we may review the irrational thinking styles in the office and complete the cognitive diary together using examples they provide. Thus, a CBT specialist will determine how much CBT the client can manage independently and how much assistance is required. People with depression often already feel inadequate so therapy should not contribute further to this feeling of inadequacy. Instead, it should help encourage by creating manageable goals and teaching how to achieve those goals. Where Should You Start? For someone so overwhelmed with depression that it is difficult to engage in basic daily activities, it is important to have a therapist guide you. The therapist can develop manageable goals and the steps to achieving those goals. In addition, the following provides some ways to make CBT less overwhelming when you are depressed: 1) Break goals down into smaller steps. Therapists know that the research indicates that if depressed individuals engage in activities they normally would find enjoyable, it can help reduce the depression. However, too often when people who have depression are told to be more active, it seems like an impossible task. It is similar to asking a sedentary person to start running a marathon. Therefore, break an activity down into smaller components that are more manageable. For instance, many of my clients tell me that normally they enjoy reading but no longer can focus or find it pleasurable. However, I do find that most of them can focus and read short magazine articles. By starting with something like reading the jokes in the Reader's Digest, they can build their ability to focus while obtaining some enjoyment. Sometimes it is difficult for those with depression to take small steps because they believe that such steps are too insignificant and won't make a difference. However, most of the things people accomplish are based on small steps or goals. For instance, Tolkien wrote The Lord of the Rings averaging fewer than 250 words a daythat's about 25% of the words you just read in this article. Small steps truly can move mountains! Don't dismiss small steps but instead appreciate each step you take. Another attitude of many people with depression is that they shouldn't have to develop goals, especially simple ones, to do something enjoyable. It seems absurd to them. However, depression takes away natural joy and, unfortunately, to combat the depression it is necessary to create steps to gain the simple pleasures back. This is a consequence of the depression and not a fault or weakness of the individual. 2) Do something that takes little effort. The tasks of CBT require effort. However, usually some method can be found for each individual that is manageable. That is why Excel At Life's apps have many different methods. Everyone does not need to use every method. Choose methods that work for you and don't take too much effort. But even many of those methods can be modified to make them easier to implement if they seem impossible to accomplish. For instance, reading an article can be overwhelming which is why Excel At Life is recording many of the popular articles. If you find reading difficult, you can listen to the article. However, sometimes it may even be difficult to focus on an audio article. In that case, I tell my clients to just turn it on. Even if they don't listen to the entire article, they may hear occasional snippets that are helpful. The same is true with the relaxation audios. Instead of trying to relax (which can be difficult for some people with depression), just turn the audio on and have it play in the background. You may obtain some benefit and eventually be able to respond more to the relaxation. 3) Do something. Anything. Depression wins when you lose all interest in normal activities, and for some people, life itself. Anything you do helps to fight the depression. Instead of judging your activities as not good enough, give yourself credit for any step you take. Because every step is significant. Every time you do something, no matter what it is, you are fighting the depression and preventing it from winning. I have a client who finds it helpful to read the motivating statements on the initial screen of the Depression CBT Self-Help Guide. She turns the screen from portrait to landscape and back to read the different statements. This may seem like a simple activity, but it is potentially a very beneficial method she is using. As I have stated many times in my articles, the key to cognitive therapy is repetition. By rotating the screen of her tablet and reading the statements again and again, she is creating a new pathway in her brain. Eventually that new pathway can help her take more steps in her recovery. So, where do you start? Anywhere. Just make it simple. And begin. Specific Suggestions When Using Depression CBT Self-Help Guide When using Excel At Life's app there are several simple things you can do to get started. Once you start doing any of these it may become possible to start doing more. Don't worry about the outcome. Take one simple step. 1) Read the motivating statements. On the initial screen are a few statements that randomly display when the app is first turned on or when the screen is rotated. Reading those can help you begin to fight the depression. 2) Read more motivating statements. By selecting Menu (the three squares in the upper right corner), Settings, and Choose Statements and then Add Statements you will be able to read all of the statements that are used in the Cognitive Diary to help challenge depressive thoughts. Just reading through these can be a simple exercise to help with depression. However, if you want, you can also select the statements you find motivating to display on the initial screen. By doing so, the statements on the initial screen will be customized and more relevant to you. 3) Listen to an audio. As stated above, it can be helpful to just turn on an audio even if you can't focus completely. Start with the Depression Assistance audio and then try some of the others for relaxation. 4) Choose a picture. By selecting Menu, Settings, and Choose Design you can choose your own picture for the main screen. Choose something that normally makes you feel good when you see it. 5) Select daily points. From the initial screen, tap Points and then Select Points. Read through the list and choose simple activities that you can do. Even if you can only start with a couple points a day you may find yourself able to increase that over time. Although a little more complex, you can also add your own points to the list by selecting Menu, Settings, Customize Suggestions. 6) Read a suggestion. From the initial screen, tap Info and then Suggestions. Although there are 50 suggestions, you don't need to read them all at once. Just read one a day. Once you have been routinely doing some of these suggestions, you may find it possible to take on some of the more difficult methods in the app such as completing the Cognitive Diary. Copyright 2013 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Mobilizing Your Body's Resources: Healing from Illness or Injury by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...natural healing is to refer to a method of using your natural resources as much as possible to aid in recovery as well as to help prevent illness. These resources mobilize the body's natural defenses in addition to using the medical treatments available." Tweet Recently, a user of my website contacted me to share her story. Struggling with a serious chronic illness, she has suffered from anxiety since becoming ill. This is a common, and very normal, scenario which I will discuss later. Sherry described her first experience in the hospital as terrifying. When she returned to the hospital more recently, she used the materials on this website during her stay. I spent time on your site. I used your meditation audios and enjoyed meditating. As a matter of fact, my blood pressure was really high at one point when I was so stressed out, but I just meditated and brought it down while the nurse was standing there. She was amazed. What Sherry and many others have found is that meditation and mindfulness help control physical symptoms. This is critical to care because if natural methods can be used not as much medication may be necessary. Why is that important? Primarily because we tend to be an over-medicated society and there is still much we don't know about drug interactions. Such as: can one drug interfere with the effectiveness of another with certain physical conditions? Or, can certain drugs when combined cause negative side effects? With all the medications on the market, research cannot answer these questions with any precision. It would require a research study for all of the different possible combinations which just isn't feasible. Natural methods are essential to recovery and healing. The more an individual can assist the body in coping with and resisting illness, the chances for a positive outcome improves. Conversely, the more the individual engages in unhealthy practices, the more difficult recovery becomes. Some people when reading these statements may feel helpless or overwhelmed. They may think I'm too unhealthy already. What's the use? or It will take too much to make any changes. Too little, too late. However, the point of this article is to recognize that health involves one small step at a time. Anything you do to help mobilize your body's resources will aid in your recovery and reduce the impact of illness. Don't become overwhelmed by the big picture. Focus on what you can do today to make a difference in your health. WHAT IS NATURAL HEALING? This article was originally titled Natural Healing: Reducing the Impact of Illness. However, personally, I dislike the term natural healing because so often it has been used to imply the replacement of traditional medicine. However, the way I and many others use the phrase natural healing is to refer to a method of using your natural resources as much as possible to aid in recovery as well as to help prevent illness. These resources mobilize the body's natural defenses in addition to using the medical treatments available. They are an aid that help to improve the outcome of the medical treatments. Therefore, medical treatments are often important and necessary. However, you need be able to distinguish when a treatment is necessary or when there may be a more effective natural method. When a proven natural alternative is available, consider using it. For instance, anti-anxiety medication can be very effective at reducing anxiety but there may be a downside for many people: anti-anxiety medications can be addictive, they can have unpleasant side effects such as psycho-motor retardation (slowness and drowsiness) and memory impairment, and they can cause rebound anxiety when used for long periods. Much research has been conducted showing that not only is meditation, mindfulness, and relaxation skills effective in reducing anxiety, these methods do not have side effects and have a much lower relapse rate than the anti-anxiety medications. Therefore, these natural methods may frequently be the treatment of choice. In Sherry's case, having had a very bad experience with the anti-anxiety medications, she needed to find other means to help her with the anxiety. It's shocking how willingly doctors prescribe anti-anxiety medications and how they will even push you hard to take them. Many medical professionals view anxiety or sleep disturbance or pain as just symptoms that need to be treated and don't look at the emotional causes or behavioral treatments. Some believe that it may take too much effort to teach patients to use relaxation or meditation methods. A pill is very simple to administer. However, the pill only reduces the symptoms, it does not mobilize the body's resources. WHAT ARE THESE RESOURCES? Our bodies are complex designs. We may be physically vulnerable and susceptible to illness. However, we also have mechanisms within our bodies that help aid recovery and cope with the assaults from the world around us. A few of these include: 1) Immune system. There are so many components to the immune system to help our bodies fight off disease, I couldn't begin to list them in this article (even if I understood them all). However, suffice it to say that the basic components such as our white blood cells and antibody system help to protect us from invasive diseases. 2) Pain. Believe it or not, pain is a resource within our bodies. The presence of pain brings our attention quickly to a problem so that the problem can be resolved or managed. 3) Hormonal system. Frequently, I refer to the stress hormones which are part of the hormonal system. Although I may refer negatively to cortisol (one of these hormones) because it has been implicated in the development of abdominal body fat which is a factor in heart disease, these hormones are actually part of the body's resources. Cortisol is released initially in small amounts to help the body cope with a stressor. It is the chronic release of cortisol that can cause problems. 4) Endorphins. Our bodies naturally release chemicals to help manage pain called endorphins, a morphine-like chemical. The natural management of pain helps us to cope with situations that may otherwise overwhelm our system. For instance, many people have reported that they did not experience pain when initially suffering a severe injury. This allows the individual to deal with the threat rather than focus on the pain. 5) Autonomic nervous system. When our bodies are threatened in any way, the autonomic nervous system is activated in order to deal with the threat. This may result in a shut-down of certain activities in the body while managing the threat. For instance, the digestive process may be slowed when managing threat which is why many people have gastro-intestinal distress when suffering from illness not related to that body system. THE STRESS REACTION AND ILLNESS I refer to illness or injury as an assault on the body because that is how the body experiences itas a threat to the system. Often I find that people suffering from illness or injury (or recovering from surgery) don't recognize that their body has been assaulted. As a result, they tend to downplay the impact the illness may have on their system and ignore their body's need for recovery. Many times they may even get messages from health professionals or others indicating Recovery shouldn't take long. You'll be feeling like your old self in no time. If they are not feeling better in the allotted time, they may tend to believe something is wrong with them when it may just be the normal recovery process. However, the body recognizes that it has been assaulted. Which is why it mobilizes all its resources to fight back. Doing so takes energy which often results in secondary symptoms. These symptoms commonly include feelings of weakness, general feelings of discomfort, lack of energy, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, and depressed mood. These symptoms arise due to the need for the body to rest when it is trying to recover from the assault of illness or injury. The body will tend to shut down any unnecessary processes when it is recovering. Thus, fatigue is common because the body doesn't want to be expending energy on unnecessary activity. THE IMPORTANCE OF MANAGING ANXIETY Anxiety is frequently associated with illness for two reasons. One is that the natural defense system of the body becomes activated with the stress response. The other is that chronic illness creates concern and worry regarding possible outcomes. 1) Anxiety Due to Defense System. When the body feels threatened it activates the autonomic nervous system. The purpose of this system is to prepare the body to respond. As such, it involves energizing the body, increasing muscular tension, and increasing vigilance. These reactions may be experienced by some as agitation or anxiety. 2) Anxiety Due to Worry. Actually, anxiety that is due to worry also activates the defense system that I described above. The difference is the cognitive component. Whereas, the above scenario is a purely physiological response, anxiety due to worry is created by thoughts. When an individual catastrophizes about possible negative outcomes, the autonomic nervous system becomes activated the same as above. It is very normal to be anxious when confronted with a serious physical illness. In fact, I would think it abnormal not to have any concerns when you are dealing with an unknown situation over which you may not have control. However, it is important to manage the anxiety because it interferes with the job the body needs to do. Referring to the Panic Assistance audio, Sherry commented Your talk on anxiety made some things click for me. When you said "You can stand it. Nobody dies from an anxiety attack" etc. it just made me realize yes I can stand it. I particularly love Sherry's comment: If the Shaolin monks can break boards with their heads and meditate while hanging from a noose, I can control the situational anxiety that has come from dealing with physical illness. THE IMPACT OF MOBILIZING RESOURCES What may not be readily apparent to Sherry is the benefit she may be receiving from the meditation to actually help reduce the impact of her illness. Although her illness is not common and therefore research regarding the value of meditation is not available for it, we do know that mindfulness and meditation reduces the severity of many common illnesses. It is reasonable to assume that the same mechanisms occur with other illnesses. 1) Chronic Heart Disease Research conducted by Pischke and colleagues (2008) examined the relationship of lifestyle changes with reducing the impact of chronic heart disease (CHD) including diet, exercise, and stress management. The results indicated that the lifestyle changes improved overall psychological well-being and adherence to treatment. Interestingly, stress management helped to prevent narrowing of the arteries independently of the benefit found with dietary changes. In other words, the improved psychological well-being associated with stress management has a physical impact on controlling heart disease. This appears to be consistent with studies showing the excessive release of cortisol, a stress hormone, plays a role in the development of heart disease. 2) Diabetes Researchers reported improvement with diabetes self-care and blood sugars outcome based on adding a psychological component to a 1-day diabetes education class. The psychological component included mindfulness training and acceptance practice which is cognitive training focused on the specific thoughts regarding the illness. Such training helped to improve the individual's sense of ability to cope with the illness (Gregg et.al. 2007). 3) Asthma Cognitive-behavioral methods have been shown to be effective in improving the outcome of those with asthma (Lehrer et.al. 2002). I have experienced this myself. Although I don't have severe asthma, I have found that improving my lung capacity with exercise and being aware of my triggers has substantially reduced my reliance on medications. 4) Insomnia More and more the CBT methods are being recognized as the treatment of choice (over medications) for long-term insomnia primarily due to the effectiveness of CBT combined with its lack of side effects or the addictive properties common to the medications. Particularly interestingly is a systematic review of the medical literature in PubMed by Kozasa and colleagues (2010) which concluded that cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is more effective than sleep medications for long-term insomnia. 5) Pain Management A review of the research shows the importance of the role of psychology as part of the team treatment of chronic pain (Turk & Burwinkle, 2005). HOW DO I MOBILIZE THESE RESOURCES? Determine what areas of your health over which you have some control and decide what action you can take. You don't need to change everything at once. Any steps in the direction of taking control will be helpful. You may not have direct control over the illness itself, but you may be able to use some of these methods: 1) Mindfulness, Meditation, Relaxation. (see article: Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? for more info) These methods have been shown to help reduce certain chemicals in the system. For instance, they help return the autonomic nervous system back to normal functioning by releasing norepinephrine which has the opposite effect of adrenalin (or epinephrine). In addition, they reduce the release of cortisol. In other words, these methods help to calm the body and restore the body to a healthy state of equilibrium. Instead of the body continuing to throw more and more weapons at the problem, it is able to recover, regroup, and get ready for the next event. Think of it similar to watering a plant. Water is good for the plant. However, if you keep watering the plant when it doesn't need it, the roots become water-logged, develop rot, and the plant dies due to lack of water. By letting the soil dry out, the natural process for the plant works properly. 2) Self-Talk. How we talk to ourselves affects the likelihood of engaging in positive health behaviors. Negativity and hopelessness lead to poorer outcomes due to not taking the necessary steps to improve health. The meditation audios (Loving-Kindness and Compassion) involve both the meditation discussed above as well as self-talk. A review of the literature by Barnard and Curry (2011) indicates that self-compassion is related to a number of positive attributes. First, it is associated with positive mood states, a sense of well-being, and satisfaction with life. The development of self-compassion through cognitive and meditative methods tends to reduce negativity, depression, and anxiety. Such effects may be related to the reduced fear of failure as well as worry. 3) Exercise. Certainly, exercise won't help when you are in the recovery stage of illness. The idea with exercise is to help your body function at its highest level generally. That way you maximize the potential of your resources so that when your body needs those resources to recover from illness, they are available. 4) Nutrition. Similar to exercise, the healthier you eat, the more you help your body function at its highest level. However, with nutrition it can help you (or hurt you) during the recovery phase. Stay away from foods that require a lot of energy to digest and focus on healthy foods that provide energy. Maybe that's why chicken noodle soup has always been the food of choice by moms when someone is sick. REFERENCES Barnard, L.K. & Curry, J.F. (2011). Self-Compassion: Conceptualizations, Correlates, & Interventions. Review of General Psychology, 15, 289-303. Gregg, J.A., Callaghan, G.M, Hayes, S.C. & Glenn-Lawson, J.L. (2007). Improving Diabetes Self-Management Through Acceptance, Mindfulness, and Values: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology Copyright, 2007, 75, 336343. Kozasa, E.H., Hachul, H., Monson, C., Pinto, Jr.L., Garcia, M.C., Mello, L.E., & Tufik, S. (2010). Mind-body interventions for the treatment of insomnia: a review. Revista Brasileira Psiquiatria, 32:437-43. Review. Lehrer, P., Feldman, J., Giardino, N., Song, H.,& Schmaling, K. (2002). Psychological Aspects of Asthma. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 691-711. Pischke, C.R., Scherwitz, L., Weidner, G. & Ornish, D. (2008). Long-Term Effects of Lifestyle Changes on Well-Being and Cardiac Variables Among Coronary Heart Disease Patients. Health Psychology, 27, 584-592. Turk, D.C. & Burwinkle, T.M. (2005). Clinical Outcomes, Cost-Effectiveness, and the Role of Psychology in Treatments for Chronic Pain Sufferers. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 36, 602610. Copyright 2012 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles General Self-esteem The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire measures general self-esteem which is the attitude you have towards yourself. Take test No login required to obtain results Related reading: 20 Steps to Better Self-esteem The Pillars of the Self-Concept: Self-Esteem and Self-Efficacy More questionnaires: General Self-Efficacy List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Blascovich, Jim and Joseph Tomaka. 1993. "Measures of Self-Esteem." Pp. 115-160 in J.P. Robinson, P.R. Shaver, and L.S. Wrightsman (eds.), Measures of Personality and Social Psychological Attitudes. Third Edition. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research. Owens, Timothy J. 1994. "Two Dimensions of Self-Esteem: Reciprocal Effects of Positive Self-Worth and Self-Deprecation on Adolescent Problems." American Sociological Review. 59:391-407. Owens, Timothy J. 1993. "Accentuate the Positive - and the Negative: Rethinking the Use of Self-Esteem, Self-Deprecation, and Self-Confidence." Social Psychology Quarterly. 56:288-99. Owens, Timothy J. 2001. Extending Self-Esteem Theory and Research. Cambridge: University Press. Rosenberg, Morris. 1965. Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. (Chapter 2 discusses construct validity.) Rosenberg, Morris. 1986. Conceiving the Self. Krieger: Malabar, FL. Silber, E. and Tippett, Jean 1965. "Self-esteem: Clinical assessment and measurement validation." Psychological Reports, 16, 1017-1071. (Discusses multitrait-multimethod investigation using RSE). Wells, L. Edward and Gerald Marwell. 1976. Self-Esteem: Its Conceptualization and Measurement. Beverly Hills: Sage. Wylie, Ruth C. 1974. The Self-Concept (especially pp. 180-189.) Revised Edition. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles When Your Loved One Refuses Help by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. ...try and determine what the reason may be. The best way to do this is to listen to the concerns of your loved one. Use active listening methods to help you further understand. Tweet One of the most frustrating aspects of living with someone who has a mental illness is when that person refuses to get help. Often, seeing the individual's pain and suffering, the parent or spouse desperately wants to help but feels helpless. Unfortunately, there's no easy solution. And there's certainly no quick solution which is often why family member's attempts at solving the problem is more likely to cause a deterioration of the situationthey try quick fixes such as telling their family member what to do or giving ultimatums. The following doesn't offer any magic words to use to convince your loved one to seek help. Instead, it describes a process of understanding your loved one better, improving your relationship, and helping to remove the obstacles to seeking help. Why do family members resist your help? Frequently, I have found when providing therapy, my clients have already been told by their family members the very things they learn from me. So why are they able to listen to me and not to their family? Most of the time people believe the reason is due to privacy concernsa person doesn't want to share problems with a family member who might be involved. Usually, however, the reason a person can listen to a therapist is related to several issues: emotional involvement, approach, and understanding mental illness. The concern about privacy is more likely due to these other factors. 1) Emotional involvement. The closer a person is to a situation, the more desperate they become to change the situation. Many family members see mental illness as life-threatening, sometimes literally due to the possibility of suicide, drug overdose, or living in a dangerous situation. For some, though, the threat may not be as literal but may be the fear of their family member not being able to support themselves or live a satisfying life. When a person is desperate, they become more demanding: You can't keep living this way. You've got to get some help! When heard by the person with mental illness, such statements of desperation sound like condemnations and blame: You're choosing to live this way or You're not capable of managing your life. As a therapist, I don't act out of emotional involvement or desperation so I am able to listen to my client, their needs and desires, and gently guide them without putting demands on them. In such a way, therapists are able to bypass resistance. In fact, what I more frequently need to do is help them stop placing demands on themselves. When they have been surrounded by the demands of others they tend to incorporate those demands into their own thinking. And demands are incompatible with change because they create additional stress. 2) Approach. Since family members of those with mental illness often feel an internal demand to make life better for their loved one they feel a pressure to change things more quickly. In response to that pressure, they take the most direct route to changetell someone what they are doing wrong and how to transform. As a result the pressure is transferred to the loved one in their desperation. You need to relax! may be an accurate statement but the delivery is an unhelpful demand. Not only is it a demand but it does not give the person information on how to accomplish the task of relaxing. Certainly, if problems were as easy to solve as telling someone what to do, we should all be thin, stress-free, financially stable, and in satisfying relationships. However, approach not only matters but may be the most important part of being heard. So, as a therapist, instead of immediately telling someone what to do, I start with helping them understand what they are experiencing and why making further demands won't help. Then, I might make suggestions Why don't we try some things and see what helps? and will practice the methods with my client until I'm sure they understand. For instance, I teach them the relaxation methods during the session to see how they respond so that we can find the methods that work best for them. Or, we take a situation and write it down using the cognitive diary method and teach them how to examine their thinking. 3) Understanding mental illness. From the outside, when a person doesn't understand mental illness it seems that recovery is a matter of taking some simple steps. If only you do this..! Without understanding the challenges faced, they often provide simplified strategies that don't work, and instead, cause their loved one to feel more like a failure. I have made the same mistake inadvertently. Even though I try to convey the information to my clients that any progress is good, if I say Try doing this one minute exercise 10 times a day and they are unable to do it, they will feel like a failure. Even though something might seem simple to you, it may not be for someone with mental illness. So, instead, I say,Try this exercise for no more than a minute or so as many times as you are able during the day but no more than 10. That way the message limits them from doing too much rather than too little. Reasons people are reluctant to get help First, you need to try and discern the reason your loved one does not pursue getting help. You may not be able to get an answer directly from your loved one because asking the question Why won't you seek help? may create further resistance. Therefore, you need to try and determine what the reason may be. The best way to do this is to listen to the concerns of your loved one. Use active listening methods to help you further understand. Active listening involves rephrasing what they say so they know you are listening which usually helps further the conversation. So, when you are around other people you feel intense anxiety which is very painful or Depression feels like dragging a sack of rocks behind youalthough you want to do things it saps your energy. When you engage in active listening, it is best to stay away from questions because questions, especially why questions, feel like accusations to others. However, with careful phrasing it is possible to ask how, when, and what questions. When do you feel like that? or Do you know what seems to trigger those feelings? Once you have some idea of the possible reasons, you may be able to determine some means to encourage your family member to seek help. The following is a list of common reasons people may resist seeking help: 1) Hopelessness. Most people with mental illness have tried to seek help at some point. Unfortunately, many people have had bad experiences and conclude that nothing can make a difference. In addition, the hallmark of certain mental illnesses such as depression is hopelessness. If a person believes that nothing will ever improve, why make the effort? For those who feel hopeless, it is necessary to help them feel hope. But that can't be done by telling them to feel hopeful. Experience is the best motivator for change. If someone experiences something positive, they are more likely to feel hopeful. That is why in treatment of depression we often encourage people to do something they normally would enjoy. Even if they don't think they will enjoy it, engaging in an activity that normally is enjoyable increases the odds of something positive which can increase hopefulness and motivation. 2) Low self-esteem. Often people don't believe in their ability to make changes in their life. They already feel bad about their situation and blame themselves. When others try to tell them what they should do, it just confirms their feelings of failure. Even though my series 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem was written for those with low self-esteem, it can provide you with understanding how to best help someone when self-esteem is an issue. However, be careful and don't make the suggestions demands. Instead, use it as a guideline to increase your understanding as to how you can approach your loved one. 3) Stigma. Seeking help may make people feel worse because of the stigma associated with mental illness. The bias against those with mental illness leading others to blame them or see them as less capable increases their feelings of failure. As a result many people refuse help because they don't want to acknowledge mental illness. Read: 5 Comon Microaggressions Against Those With Mental Illness 4) Emotions or anxiety is intolerable. People with mental illness already have intense emotions that overwhelm them. They may try to ignore or avoid these emotions as a way of managing the illness. In this case they might not seek therapy because of the fear of confronting the emotions. Many of my clients have told me that they are afraid of losing themselves in the emotions and feeling that way forever. Or, they're afraid they will do something they might regret: "If I let myself feel the anger, I might hurt someone!" 5) Fear of discrimination and rejection. Many people with mental illness are fearful that if others knew of their problems they may be avoided or ignored due to the stigma associated with mental illness. This reason is more about how others might treat them than about the stigma itself. For instance, they might not want to take a leave of absence from work because of how others might react towards them or gossip about them. 6) Offended by pity. Some people with mental illness feel that seeking help is associated with pity. They don't want to be treated like a child and seeking help implies they can't take care of themselves. 7) Resistant to demands. Most people react negatively to authoritarian demands. They don't want to be told what to do because it implies they are incapable of knowing how to make decisions in their lives. People with mental illness have probably been told more than most what they should do so they have built up even more barriers than usual to demands from others. How can you help your loved one get help? 1) Treat them as an adult. Although I was not a child psychologist and didn't think I knew how to relate to them, I often found that children liked to see me. Eventually I came to the conclusion the reason children liked me was because I treated them as I would an adult. I listened to them, asked what they wanted, and I didn't tell them what to do but asked if they wanted me to help. Then I gave them control over the options: We could do this or this. What do you think? This is especially important when helping young adults. They need to develop a sense of self-efficacythe belief that they have the ability to make a difference in their lives. The way to do this is to respect how they feel and think and their ability to make choices. 2) Process vs. outcome. People often want to get right to the solution when helping others but often the process is more important. If you focus on pushing a solution you don't help the person learn to solve problems. Understandably, it can be especially difficult to allow them to process a problem when you can see their choices will lead to bad consequences. But I don't think we can fully know that to be the case. As a psychologist, I've learned that I don't always know the outcome of decisions even though I might think it will end badly. It would be arrogant of me to think that I know better than the person who is making personal life choices. So when I help people I try to not tell them what to do, but instead, assist them in the decision-making process. 3) Respect differences. All lives are different and we can't expect that someone should pursue the path we think is best. When my son was a teenager and played chess in tournaments I noticed that a number of the adult players lived in their cars and traveled from tournament to tournament to make a few bucks. I said to my son, I guess if that is what made you happy in life, I would be okay with it. He responded, It's really hard to have a girlfriend living that way. But my point is that we can't presume to know what is best for different people and we need to respect their life choices. 4) Try not to use words that mean should. Shoulds imply demands and expectations. It tells the other person that they are bad or wrong and don't know how to solve problems in their lives. 5) Active listening. Instead of telling them what you think, listen to what they are saying. Instead of trying to convince them otherwise, reflect back their emotions. Yes, it can be really scary to see a therapist and tell a stranger how you feel. Active listening helps a person explore their concerns and options. Your loved one is more likely to open up when you use active listening whereas telling them what to do or asking why questions is more likely to shut them down. 6) Develop compassion, not empathy. Empathy gets you too close to the emotional state of the other person and since that emotional state can be fairly intense, the inclination is to want to solve the problem so you can escape the intensity of the emotion yourself. Too much empathy drives people to desperation. When, as a parent, you feel the pain of your loved one, you also more desperately want to change the situation. And as we discussed previously, desperation leads to pressure which only worsens the problem. Often people have asked me how I can listen to other people's problems all day long and not become overwhelmed by them. The answer is that I have to keep my empathy in check and rely more on compassion. Feeling the emotions of others who are in intense emotional states would be unbearable after awhile and wouldn't allow a therapist the emotional distance they need to help others. Compassion, however, involves some distance so that you can feel for the other person but not feel the demand to solve the problem. The emotional distance of compassion allows a person to be more helpful. 7) Use the cognitive-behavioral (CBT) methods yourself. The methods used in CBT are helpful with solving any kind of problem. By using the methods yourself, you will have a greater understanding of them and will be able to share information at a more personal level. These methods can help you examine your own thinking that may put pressure on your loved one. It can also help you manage your stress. When you feel less stress you experience less internal demand to make things change which allows you to be more effective. In addition, it sets a good example for your loved one. 8) Examine co-dependency. Even though you want your loved one to get help you may inadvertently set up obstacles. I once treated a bright young woman with a great sense of humor who could have been an asset to employers but she quit therapy telling me, Therapy is too hard and I know my mother will take care of me. If you are overly involved in solving your loved one's problems and making life easier for her, therapy for yourself may help you look at co-dependency issues and how to be appropriately supportive. Copyright 2016 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Catastrophe? Or, Inconvenience? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Listen Tweet January 2021 update: Once again I hear those in the media making catastrophic pronouncements by referring to the past year as the "worst year ever." I acknowledge it has been a very difficult year for many people but we need to keep perspective. 2020 has been catastrophic to some people. However, if you are still able to feed and house your family and haven't experienced tragic deaths, 2020 has been an inconvenience. For the most part, we have had to make adjustments to our lives that are inconveniences but not catastrophes. A catastrophe is a tragic event of extreme misfortune that is beyond our ability to cope. But not only have we been able to cope but people have developed creative solutions to problems, many have rediscovered what is important in life, children have learned to confront adversity, and we've all learned more about developing psychological flexibility to cope with the many changes. Be a critical thinker and evaluate what you hear and how you will allow it to influence you. Listening to the weather forecast one frigid day, I realized how much we are influenced by the catastrophic thinking of the media. The weatherman reported, "The weather has brought more misery to the St. Louis area." Certainly, the weather was causing problems that day. An ice storm caused car doors and locks to be frozen so that people had a great deal of trouble getting into their cars. However, I thought, unless someone was in the middle of nowhere with no cell phone and they were unable to open their car door because of the ice, this was not "misery." Instead, I would call it an "inconvenience." Most of us walked out to our cars to find that we couldn't open the door, went back inside a warm house or office, and found some solution to our problem. Influence of negative messages As a cognitive therapist I am well aware of the influence our thinking has upon moods and behavior. Yet, I became fascinated with how much we are inundated by negative messages that can seriously affect how we perceive a situation and how we feel. Many people may believe that I might be overstating the consequences of such a simple word as "misery." However, try a simple experiment for yourself. The next time it is raining, tell your colleagues or family "It's just miserable and dreary out" and watch their reactions. Do they tend to respond with a negative comment? Especially pay attention to their nonverbals: do they appear happy? do they appear alert? do they commiserate with a frown? do their shoulders sag? do they sigh? Then try telling others "I find listening to the sound of the rain so relaxing." Is there a difference in the nonverbals? Are they more likely to respond with pleasant conversation? Such a simple and fairly insignificant example. Yet, if you find that people respond differently in these two conditions, imagine this response multiplied by all the daily influences in our lives: other people, television, internet, newspapers, radio. In fact, don't just imagine but pay attention to the words that are used by the media. Take a news article and highlight the emotionally influential words. Listen to a talk show and write down the times they make negative comments. How do you feel when you listen to a show with many negative words and comments? Do you feel more angry or burdened? Or do you feel refreshed or energized? Why these messages impact us So why is this a serious problem? Because of the psychological concept "self-fulfilling prophecy." A self-fulfilling prophecy refers to a belief that creates an outcome. For example, if an individual is walking into a social gathering and thinks "I have so much trouble talking to people. I'm probably going to end up sitting by myself," he is likely to have exactly the outcome predicted. The negative thought and prediction causes the person to project certain nonverbal messages such as not smiling or lacking eye contact with others which tends to make him less approachable. In addition, he may be less likely to initiate contact because of the belief. And therefore, the prediction comes true and he sits in a corner by himself. On the other hand, a self-fulfilling prophecy can also have a positive prediction. For example, let's say the person thinks "I have so much trouble talking to people. But I know I can introduce myself and smile and listen to others well. So I'll be able join a group and not sit by myself." This person is much more likely to have the positive outcome predicted. Many years ago I treated a woman with severe Social Phobia. Terrified to be around others, she did her grocery shopping in the middle of the night and never interacted with others unless it was unavoidable. As she made progress in therapy, one day she reported excitedly "Someone asked me for directions at the mall." At first I was confused by this innocuous situation. However, she explained "Even when I was out in public in the past, no one ever approached me or smiled at me." Her previous self-fulfilling prophecy that no one could possibly like her had changed to the belief that she was a likeable person. As a result, her nonverbals had changed and other people could now approach her. This led to her being able to make friends, take classes, and get promoted to a supervisory position at work. Identifying events as inconveniences Therefore, my proposition is that the words we use can have quite an impact upon how we feel about a situation. If we look at a situation as an inconvenience rather than a catastrophe we will approach it differently and not feel as overwhelmed. One day a couple years ago just as I finished a session with my last client of the day in which we discussed this very topic and walked out to my car I noticed I had a flat tire. I said to myself, "This is an opportunity to practice what you preach. A flat tire is really just an inconvenience." However, I was supposed to teach a cardio kickboxing class that evening and I probably wasn't going to make it. So, I called AAA to fix my tire and another cardio teacher to handle my class continuing to remind myself that this is just an inconvenience. Prior to the truck from AAA arriving I received a call about someone I knew personally who was making suicidal threats and I needed to assist. Throughout all this I remained calm and handled both situations. Later, I recognized that by not responding as if it was a catastrophe that a friend was suicidal while my car was broke down, I was less stressed by the situation and was better able to assist. Now, I'm certainly not saying that nothing is catastrophic. However, we need to be careful how many events we tend to classify in that category. I think in general we over-classify events as catastrophes. Most situations are not catastrophes and we need to keep perspective. For instance, one time when I was viewing things in my life more negatively, my husband looked up from the paper and said, "Here's an article about some folks in Ethiopia who were crossing the country on foot to get to another country for food and they were eaten by lions." That immediately put things in perspective for me because that was a true catastrophe. A client I had who was dying of cancer once said to me, "If a problem can be solved by throwing money at it, it's not really a problem." She meant that even if you didn't have the money, it was still a solvable problem. Whereas, it didn't matter how much money she threw at the cancer, it was unsolvable. She was going to die no matter what. Is anything a catastrophe? Yet, in a philosophical sense, we could take this premise even further and question whether death is even a catastrophe. Suffering and death are normal parts of life just as joy and happiness are. I'm not saying we should embrace suffering and look forward to death, but I am saying that we can choose to focus on the joy and happiness in life by not making inconveniences into catastrophes. Addendum: Since I wrote the above article and 2009 is drawing to a close, I've had numerous clients echoing a common theme "I'm glad this decade is almost over." Usually, when a number of people are voicing something similar and negative, it can be traced back to the media. Sure enough, one of my clients told me that he heard a media personality declare the decade ending in 2009 (which technically isn't true until the end of 2010) as "The decade from hell." Once I started paying attention, I've heard numerous other examples in the media describing this decade in pejorative terms. What a good example with which to make my point about the influence of words upon how we feel. How many of you have heard these types of comments and then readily agreed? And as a result tended to feel more sad, frustrated, irritated? Do you want to turn control of your life over to this type of influence? If not, make a resolution to refuse to allow the media to dictate how you think and feel. Be a critical thinker and evaluate what you hear and how you will allow it to influence you. Because unless Armageddon occurred while I wasn't looking, I don't know how the last ten years could be labeled "The decade from hell." Copyright 2009 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Emotion Training Audios Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma Audio Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Audio Building Blocks Emotion Training Audio Related reading: Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? Why Are Meditative Relaxation and Mindfulness Important? A Brief Primer on the Biology of Stress and How CBT Can Help PsychNotes: Emotions Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training with Music If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Building Blocks Emotion Training If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Tweet Mindful Grounding for Anxiety/Trauma This audio provides assistance when you are overwhelmed with anxiety and can't focus on relaxation especially if you are experiencing depersonalization or derealization (you or your surroundings don't feel real). The grounding technique can be particularly helpful when someone has anxiety due to trauma which is causing flashbacks to the memory of the trauma. It has you focus on your immediate surroundings to help focus away from the traumatic memory. This type of audio is not for the purpose of relaxation but to help you feel more focused so that you can use other techniques. Once you have used the mindful grounding technique and can focus a bit more, it is a good idea to use the relaxation audios to help calm yourself further. It is best to listen to this audio for the first time when you don't need it so that you will have an idea of what to expect. In addition, developing an understanding of mindfulness can help with this practice: Understanding Mindfulness. TRANSCRIPT Listen Rainbow Relaxation Emotion Training Audio relaxation exercise focused on teaching the three main methods of relaxation which include slow, relaxed breathing, muscle relaxation, and guided imagery. The imagery describes floating through a rainbow and experiencing different emotions with each color. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to calm yourself or to feel more confident or at peace at times when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with certain colors. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the color which will help you experience the emotion. Choose imagery based upon what seems pleasant for you. This may be used while sitting or lying down in a quiet, comfortable place. Just close your eyes and listen without trying to force yourself to relax. If your mind wanders, gently bring yourself back to focus on the words. Although it describes gradually coming back to full awareness at the end of the exercise, some people use this to help with sleep. They just tell themselves to ignore the directions to become more aware. Do not use while operating a vehicle! Voice only version With music version Building Blocks Emotion Training The purpose of this audio is to help cope with certain emotional states. It can be particularly useful for those with anxiety disorders such as Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Panic Disorder. In addition, many of those with Borderline Personality Disorder may find it helpful. The imagery describes building a special place with rooms designed for different emotions: a room that helps you feel peaceful when you are anxious or tense, a room that helps you feel strong and in control when you are fearful, a room that feels comforting when you are sad, a room where you can release anger, a room that helps with concentration and focus, aroom that energizes you, a room where you can access your creative energy, hopes, and dreams, and a room designed for restful sleep. This imagery is particularly useful to learn how to access or manage certain emotions when you are not listening to the audio. By practicing repeatedly, you will begin to pair certain emotions with the imagery of the rooms that you have built. Then you can draw on that pairing by imagining the room which will help you manage the emotion or the state of being that you choose. For instance, if you are taking a test and need to concentrate, you can visually the room you have created for concentration to access that state. When you use this exercise repeatedly, it is best to imagine building the rooms in the same way so that the pairing becomes more powerful. However, you can add detail to the rooms to make them more vivid. Do not use while operating a vehicle! TRANSCRIPT Listen Tweet Questions and Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Emotions Compassion: Selflessness With a Selfish Purpose Snap Judgments of People as Creepy May Harm You Perspective, Empathy, and Forgiveness Convincing Yourself to Forgive When It Seems Unfair Do You Have Too Much Empathy? Difference Between Dealing With Emotions and Being Stuck in Negative Emotions It's Just Words Irrational: Is it the Word or the Intention that is Offensive? When Emotional Reasoning Interferes With Having a Dialog About Micro-aggressions Gratitude Associated With Self-control Developing Emotional Tolerance When You are Distressed: Write! Predicting Regret to Help Make Decisions Understanding Asperger's Syndrome, Grief, and Avoidance of Loss When to Forgive Yourself: Self-forgiveness and Responsibility Importance of Guilt vs. Irrational Guilt The Costs of Get Over It Empathy Requires a Strong Sense of Self Six Characteristics that Distinguish a Healthy Anger from Hate Love Enhances Men's Ability to Recognize Emotion Rejection Elicits Positive Coping Among Those With High Self-Esteem Mindful Attention Reduces Anger for Those With Borderline Personality Disorder Addiction to Emotions and Mindfulness Practice Does Sadness Cause Depression? Acceptance as the Basis for Wisdom? Drug Companies to Profit From Grief? An Opinion I want to feel good NOW! Moody? Maybe It's Your Stomach Bacteria Be Realistic! Not Optimistic! Anxiety and the Avoidance of Positive Emotions Being Mindful of Emotions Decreases Intensity Grief is Not Depression To Cry or Not to Cry? Qi Gong Exercise Shown to Improve Mood Afraid of Feeling Good? Leave Work at Work: Emotional Detachment Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles What to Do When Your Partner's Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Relationship by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "The main risk of trying to do something about your partner's jealousy is that you may have to risk the relationship itself." Tweet I had had some good questions on my website regarding handling a partner's irrational jealousy. The reason I wrote the article What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage for the individual with the problem jealousy is because until that person decides to make changes nothing can be done to eliminate their jealousy. That article has been very popular and many people have indicated to me that they are trying to change their behavior after reading it. However, there are many other people who are not recognizing their jealous behavior and so their partners are writing to me asking what to do. Just because the person with the jealousy problem is the only one who can change it doesn't mean that there is nothing that you, as the partner, can do about your partner's jealousy. However, the steps you can take may be very challenging and don't come without risk. If you truly want a chance for your partner to change, the best place to start is with yourself. By changing how you respond to your partner's jealousy you will develop a greater understanding of how difficult it is to make changes. This increases your empathy for your partner especially if he/she is trying to make changes. However, it may also make you less tolerant of someone refusing to recognize their problem or do anything about it. This could be a healthy thing for you because you are less likely to remain in a destructive relationship. Usually jealousy is a problem for the non-jealous partner when the behavior gets out of control. The jealous individual may engage in excessive questioning, make accusations, seek excessive reassurance, and may even control their partner's activities. Of course, no matter how much reassurance is given, faithfulness can never be proven, only disproved. So the jealous person's behavior continues and tends to escalate. The first thing that the recipient of this behavior needs to recognize is that the behavior is controlling and abusive. However, sometimes the recipient of the jealous behavior believes that it just shows that his/her partner is deeply in love. Jealousy is not a sign of love, it is a sign of insecurity. Love is not controlling. When we love someone we allow them to grow independently of us because by doing so they are with us by choice, not by demand. The main risk of trying to do something about your partner's jealousy is that you may have to risk the relationship itself. Before you go any further, you must ask yourself, "Why am I willing to take this kind of abuse? Do I deserve to be treated this way?" Just as the person who is jealous has a problem with self-esteem, if you are willing to tolerate this type of relationship, it indicates that you have a problem with self-esteem. Another question you need to ask yourself is, "Am I willing to risk everything in order to try and improve my relationship?" The answer to this question needs to be "Yes." If it is not, there is no need to read any further. For those you who have answered "Yes" the following are the steps to take. Recognize these steps are not easy and that what I have written may not be comprehensive. If any step proves to be too difficult for you, please seek professional advice. 1) Deal with your self-esteem issues first. If you are so afraid of losing the relationship that you are willing to put up with the jealous behavior, then you need to develop a greater sense of self-worth. Start by understanding how your thinking contributes to your self-esteem problems and then learn how to change that thinking. See 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem. 2) By developing your own self-esteem, you will come to recognize that you are neither responsible for you partner's behavior nor is there anything you can do to stop the jealousy. No matter how "good" you are, your partner has a problem. The more you try to alter yourself and your life and your contact with others, the more you are enabling your partner's behavior. This is no different than if your partner is an alcoholic and you contribute to the illness by covering for him/her or by tolerating inappropriate behavior. 3) Once you have developed your self-confidence, you need to assertively communicate to your partner that his/her behavior is hurtful and you cannot tolerate this. How you communicate this is important and needs to be done in a loving way, not as criticism or in angry reaction. If you do not know how to communicate effectively, get some training first. Many community colleges have courses for the public on communication so they may be a good resource or you can see a behavior therapist for skills training. 4) If the previous step does not open your partner's eyes to his/her behavior, then you may have to take the most difficult step. You have to decide that you will not continue to tolerate this behavior and you let him/her know that. You let your partner know that he/she needs to make changes or your relationship will not be able to continue. When you discuss this issue, it needs to be in a calm manner and not during anger. You also need to let him/her know the steps you are taking including not responding to their questioning and accusations and not changing your life to try and make them feel better. If their behavior escalates and they become more abusive, this should tell you without a doubt that you are in a destructive relationship. If they begin to recognize the problem and try to make changes, then you are on the road to recovery. If you are afraid that taking these steps will escalate the situation to violence, that is a strong sign that you need to get away from the individual as soon as possible. Most communities have resources to help people in abusive relationships. Copyright 2001 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire (Adult version) The following test is for personal information only and is not meant to be a professional evaluation. This questionnaire determines how sensitive you are to rejection. Take test No login required to obtain results FOR YOUNG ADULT VERSION Related reading: The Porcupine Effect: Pushing Others Away When You Want to Connect 20 Steps to Better Self-esteem Why Social Anxiety Disorder may be Created by Culture Can Being Shy Affect Your Well-being and Relationship? Yes, but It Depends... Value Your Partner to Reduce Feelings of Rejection During Disagreements Can Facebook Make You More Anxious When Meeting Someone? Social Anxiety and Bias in Forming Impressions Acts of Kindness and Social Anxiety How Do You Handle Rejection? The Pesky Chemical Causing Social Memory Problems Social Success: Your Self-Esteem May Get In Your Way, Not Your Ability More questionnaires: Willoughby Social Anxiety Scale List of PsychTests For authors and more information: Downey G. & Feldman, S. (1996). Implications of Rejection Sensitivity for Intimate Relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1327-1343. Feldman, S. & Downey, G. (1994). Rejection sensitivity as a mediator of the impact of childhood exposure to family violence on adult attachment behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 231-247. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Are You Passive-Aggressive and Want to Change? by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. Index of Passive-Aggressive Examples "Those who are passive-aggressive (PA) and want to change are usually unintentionally PA. In other words, they are not trying to maliciously cause problems for others..." Tweet Most of us are passive-aggressive (PA) at times. Although much of the communication literature tells us we should be direct and assertive, I've always told my clients there is a time and place for different communication styles. For instance, if you've had your car in to a repair shop several times for the same problem and they want to charge you for fixing it again, being verbally aggressive might accomplish your agenda. Or, if you are confronted by an irrational angry person, a self-protective passive response of walking away may be best. I've always taught that the communication style you choose should be based on the outcome you want. For instance, with the mechanic you might not care about your long-term relationshipyou just want your car fixed, so an aggressive stance may work. But aggression is not a good choice in a relationship you care about. The same is true of PA communication. It is generally not a good choice for relationships that are important to you. Notice that I'm referring to choice. Most people act without thinking. They have long-standing behavior patterns and may not even be aware of their own PA behavior. But it is a choice to continue to engage in these patterns of behavior. Although most people readily acknowledge they don't like being on the receiving end of PA behavior because it is so frustrating and unpleasant, many people are slow to label their own PA behavior. Instead they often justify their actions by focusing completely on the other person's behavior. Yet, sometimes when people read about others' PA behavior, they begin to recognize their own behavior. If communication problems are interfering with your relationships, it might be a good idea to examine whether you have PA behavior. By recognizing when you are PA you can change your pattern and develop better relationships. The following can help you more thoroughly examine your behavior and create a plan to change. Many PA behaviors are unintentional but they are still hurtful to the relationship. Other PA behaviors may be deliberately calculated to hurt the other person. Those who are PA and want to change are usually unintentionally PA. In other words, they are not trying to maliciously cause problems for others and/or don't care about how they hurt others. Sometimes they may even have good intentions such as not wanting to hurt someone's feelings or cause a problem. But instead of direct communication about problems they engage in PA behavior. So the following focuses mainly on the unintentional type of passive-aggressiveness. What is the Purpose of Unintentional Passive-Aggressive Behavior? Usually unintentional PA behavior is either self-protective in some way or it is learned behavior. Such PA behavior can occur for a number of reasons: 1) Learned communication patterns. Unless we deliberately seek out new methods of communication, we tend to use the ones that we learned when we were children. So if someone grows up in a family where PA behavior is the primary communication method they are likely to use the same method. They may not have learned direct communication and lack problem-solving skills. When faced with potential conflict situations they resort to the PA behavior because it is all they know. 2) Fear of rejection. Some people are afraid that if they are direct, the other person may reject their request or even reject them. As such, PA behavior allows the person to deny responsibility if confronted perhaps even placing the blame on the other person: I didn't mean thatyou misunderstood. 3) Fear of anger. Some people are fearful of anger. Some may be afraid of others' anger because they have been hurt in the past. Others may be afraid of their own anger because they don't want to hurt others. Either way it results in avoidance by using PA behavior instead of directly expressing anger. Types of Unintentional Passive-Aggressive Behavior The hallmark of PA behavior is the communication of anger in an indirect or passive manner. When anger is not expressed directly, it is difficult to solve problems. The indirect expression of anger means that the recipient may pick up on non-verbal behavior cues indicating there is a problem but if they try to address it they are roadblocked by the following types of behavior. The PA person may be a combination of these types but usually has a preferred style. 1) Silent type. Instead of responding when someone confronts you, you remain silent. People who are silent when angry often are trying to avoid conflict. However, their silence indicates that a problem exists. Such behavior causes the other person to be frustrated and angry when they are trying to solve the problem. Reader's Example: Controlling by Refusing to Discuss Problems Question: Any time I want to calmly discuss a situation that is bothering me in our relationship, my husband's reply is always "I don't want to fight about this!" Although I tell him that I'm not trying to fight, I just want to talk about it, he never has the discussion with me and the problems are always left unresolved. Response 2) Hinting type. This type drops hints if they are angry or want something. If the other person doesn't get their hints, they pout or become angry. Hints may seem obvious to the person doing the hinting but they are not a clear method of communicating. The problem occurs when the person believes that their hints are perfectly understandable. I've often had clients who said that they clearly told their spouse what they wanted but when I asked for the exact wording I would classify it as a hint. It is certainly not fair to the other person when you hint but think that you are communicating clearly because then the tendency is to believe the other person is deliberately ignoring you. 3) Denying type. This type denies feelings of anger while slamming doors or other nonverbal behaviors that show anger. However, when someone accuses you of being angry or upset, you deny it: Nothing's wrong. A great deal of communication is facial expressions and other nonverbal behaviors. So it can be very frustrating to the other person when you deny your obvious anger. Once again, it prevents problem resolution. 4) Pleasing type. When angry, this type ignores their own needs and tries to please others. However, people who are pleasers frequently become resentful when others don't focus on their needs: I'm always taking care of everyone else. How come I don't ever get anything in return? The answer to this question is usually that other people aren't aware of the pleaser's needs or anger because the people-pleaser doesn't share that information. 5) Avoiding type. Instead of addressing a problem or dealing with a difficult person this type pretends there isn't a problem. Although this type is similar to the denying type, a major difference is that the denying type shows behavior indicating anger whereas the avoiding type doesn't provide any indication of anger. In fact, the topics may be avoided so completely that the avoider doesn't even know the degree of anger they feel. 6) Sarcastic type. Sarcasm is another type of denial. This type makes their feelings known through sarcasm but denies it if someone takes them seriously. Sarcasm is another way of avoiding a direct expression of emotions and taking responsibility for those feelings. 7) Anxious type. Some people with anxiety want others to behave in certain ways because of their own anxiety but instead of being direct they use indirect communication such as guilting to control them. 8) Accusing type. Instead of saying when they are angry or don't want to do something this type accuses the other person indirectly and with a tone: I will take care of it just like I always do. 9) Nice type. This type wants to control others' decisions without appearing to control. For instance, a woman who is frustrated because her husband won't take care of his health sweetly asks, Honey, are you sure that is what is best for you? Have you thought this through? If confronted they are likely to deny control and indicate they are just concerned. These are some of the unintentional ways that people can be PA. As you see, most are due to people having certain desires but instead of expressing them directly, they use indirect communication. The above descriptions are not to diagnose someone else but to understand yourself. The problem with diagnosing someone else is that we don't always know what their underlying intention is. And PA behavior always has to do with intention: it is the indirect expression of anger. So, for instance, just because someone is procrastinating and it causes you frustration, it doesn't mean they are passive-aggressively trying to cause you frustrationthey could just be procrastinating. In other words, it is not the effect on the recipient that determines passive-aggressive behavior, it is the intent of the behavior that determines it. 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People The most difficult social conflict usually involves passive-aggressive (PA) behavior. The reason it is more distressing than even aggressive behavior is because it causes the recipient to be doubtful of him or her self. When someone is aggressive towards you, their intention is clear and it is easier to make a decision such as I need to steer clear of this person or I need to report this behavior. However, the purpose of passive-aggressive behavior is for the aggressor to avoid responsibility for their actions. PA behavior can easily be denied or blame shifted: I didn't mean it the way you took it or You're being too sensitive or You're just trying to get me in trouble. As a result, PA behavior cannot be addressed in the same way you might handle aggressive behavior. When managing PA people you need to be aware of the underlying purpose of the behavior so that you can respond in a way that prevents them from succeeding at their agenda. The less likely they are to achieve their goal, the more likely you will see a reduction in their behavior. Read more... How Can You Change? 1) Choice. First, recognize that PA behavior is your choice. Just because it is how you have always behaved doesn't mean you have to continue. By looking at your communication and the consequences you can determine if PA behavior is involved. If PA behavior is causing problems or a deterioration of your relationships, you can choose to learn a more direct communication method. 2) Learn communication skills. Primarily, you want to learn how to communicate directly when you are angry, frustrated, resentful and need to solve an interpersonal problem. There are plenty of opportunities to learn these skills including books, seminars/classes, or even individual therapy. Excel At Life provides some articles on conflict resolution that can help you get started. 3) Practice. Determine some situations in which you are typically PA. Then, using what you learned about communication develop some ways of acting that are more direct and assertive. You might even write down example responses so you are more likely to remember them. It is easiest to start with situations that occur frequently because you can prepare in advance and practice (in your head or in front of a mirror) before they occur. By practicing the common situations, you will become more prepared for the less common ones. 4) Let others know. Tell your close friends and family that you recognize you can be PA and you are trying to work on it. However, it is a strong behavior pattern and you are not always aware of it. They can be helpful by gently letting you know when your behavior is hurtful. This step can be particularly difficult because PA people do not like being told when they are hurting someone. However, it is important to your recovery from this behavior to take responsibility for it. 5) Don't give up! Changing behavior takes effort. One of the more difficult aspects is that other people may still respond to you as if you are being PA. For instance, if a sarcastic person is trying to be genuine, they may still be accused of being sarcastic. Or, if a controlling person is expressing a feeling without an expectation of trying to control, that expression may still be seen by others as attempts at control. Recognize that even when you are making an effort it can be a while before you see the results of improved relationships. Copyright 2017 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Introduction by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D.Clinical Psychologist Listen Read the following to: Understand that people are mean due to some flaw in themselves or distortion in their thinking. Learn that unless you have done something significant, others' meanness is not about you. Understand the difference between unintentional meanness and malicious meanness. Learn the 8 reasons people are mean and how to determine why someone is mean. Related articles by Dr. Frank: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People Index of Passive-Aggressive Examples Next: Reason 1: Lack of Skills/Knowledge or Awareness Estimated reading time: 6 minutes To help you determine why a person might be mean: Reasons for Meanness Inventory "Why are people so mean?" seems to be a plaintive cry across the internet. Although the issue may be more prevalent online due to the anonymity and accessibility, it is by no means limited to the online community. Prevent Mean People from Hurting You Other people's meanness impacts us more than it really needs to. Although some of the time meanness is physical, most of the time it is psychological. Meanness most often causes emotional distress, feelings of betrayal, self-doubt, and grief over associated loss. However, it is possible to protect yourself from the psychological impact of meanness. The more that people can recognize that the meanness they experience from others is either unintentional or is more about the mean person rather than about them, the less they personalize the meanness and the less impact it has on them. What is Personalizing? Example: Fran focused on doing a good job at work and because she tended to not spend much time chatting with her co-workers she tended to accomplish a great deal. In fact, it was apparent to everyone that she was able to complete more tasks than her co-workers who spent a great deal of time on their phones, playing on the internet, and talking with one another. One day, one of her co-workers came out of the supervisor's office and verbally attacked Fran: I just got in trouble and it's all your fault! You make everyone else look bad by being such a brown-noser. Fran, shocked and hurt, felt bad about herself because someone was angry with her. Obviously, Fran hadn't done anything wrong. The problem in this situation was the co-worker who was directing her anger at Fran rather than taking responsibility for her own behavior. This misdirected self-protective behavior often occurs when someone has problems with insecurity which frequently leads to jealousy and blame. However, even though Fran wasn't wrong, she still suffered the consequences of the co-worker's wrath. In fact, this is the purpose of such behavior, by blaming the problem on someone else and causing them to feel bad, the co-worker could feel better. Personalization is interpreting someone's behavior as being about you or due to you and then feeling bad about yourself. If Fran could recognize that the co-worker's attack was due to the co-worker's personal problems and had nothing to do with her, she could more easily shrug it off and not suffer the consequences of it. Why Are So Many People Mean? Circumstances cause meanness. I don't believe most people are mean people. However, under the right circumstances, most people can be mean. For example, about 50 years ago Milgram conducted his famous obedience studies which involved telling the subject that a person in the next room was attached to a machine that delivered electric shock (unknown to the subject, the device was not actually attached). The subject was to ask this person questions and to deliver a shock for wrong answers by flipping a switch on the machine in front of them. The device had a dial on it clearly labeled from mild to dangerous. The researcher told the subject to increase the amount of shock with each wrong answer. Although most people deny they would turn the dial to dangerous and shock someone when told to do so, Milgram found that nearly 70% of the subjects obeyed the researcher and increased the shock to the dangerous range even when they heard screaming, and finally silence, from the next room. (This type of study is not allowed to be conducted today due to the potential psychological harm to the subject from knowing they could cause harm to another human being.) Most of you reading this are probably trying to rationalize right now why you would not be among that 70% or you are thinking that something must have been different about those people who were subjects in the study. However, the research and other similar research was conducted with different variations showing the same type of outcome. This research shows what I stated earlier, that under the right circumstances most people can be mean. The circumstance in this research was the pressure to obey, the pressure to conform, the stress of the situation, and the fear of authority. These are only some of the circumstances that may contribute to people doing mean things even when they are not mean people. Mean People Are Noticeable. Often there seems to be so many mean people in the world around us because the behavior of mean people tends to be more noticeable. One reason we notice meanness more than niceness is the way our brains are wired for survival. According to Rick Hanson, author of Buddha's Brain, we need to be especially observant of the negative things in our environment because those are the things that are most likely to harm us. As a result, those most likely to survive and pass their genes to the next generation were those who were particularly sensitive to danger in the environment. Another reason mean people are more noticeable is that their behavior is often particularly offensive and hurtful. We are more likely to notice and focus on the person who cut us off in traffic rather than the person who let us merge. The more malicious the behavior, the more likely we are to be distressed and to dwell on what occurred. However, this supports my position that meanness isn't the norm. For instance, notice what stories make the news. The nature of news is that it is unusual or it has an extreme impact on people's lives. A good example is that the West Nile virus that had significantly fewer episodes and fatalities than the flu got much more media attention. Or a major airplane crash, because it is so rare, will get extensive coverage. And certainly, anything negative tends to generate more media focus than positive things. Therefore, since meanness gets our attention, I would propose that it is actually rarer than niceness but more noticeable. Meanness is Rewarded. Unfortunately, another aspect of meanness that makes it more visible is that it is often rewarded. Sometimes the reward can be tangible such as a ruthless businessman being rewarded by making more money. Or, an obnoxious co-worker getting a promotion. However, it can also be rewarded with attention or escalation of conflict. Sometimes mean people want others to feel bad so they can feel better (i.e. "misery loves company"). It varies with each person what sort of reward is meaningful, although for meanness to continue there must be some sort of reward to the perpetrator. We will examine this further as we look at the different reasons for meanness. Unintentional vs. Malicious Meanness Although I tried to organize the types of reasons for being mean from unintentional to malicious, I recognize that a case can be made for maliciousness or unintentional meanness in almost any of the categories. However, I believe that, in general, the following categories represent a continuum of meanness from unintentional to malicious. Unintentional meanness refers to behavior or statements that the recipient may perceive as mean but that weren't intended to be hurtful. Whereas malicious meanness is behavior or statements that have the purpose of hurting the recipient. The idea of a continuum is that most mean behavior is a mixture of intentionality. Also, much of intentional meanness may not be severe enough in its impact to be considered malicious. Therefore, malicious meanness for the purpose of this article and the categories I have created is considered both intended and extreme. Next: Reason 1: Lack of Skills/Knowledge or Awareness Reason 2: Miscommunication/Misunderstanding Reason 3: Misdirected Intentions Reason 4: Self-protection Reason 5: Reactive Meanness Reason 6: Mental Disturbance Reason 7: Feelings of Superiority Reason 8: Pleasure-seeking Conclusion: Protect yourself by not personalizing mean behavior Copyright 2011 (Revised 2022) by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles What to Expect from Mindfulness-based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT) When You Have Depression and Anxiety by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "...the expectations people have regarding treatment may be unrealistic. Understanding what can be expected from treatment can be helpful when assessing the effectiveness of treatment." Tweet When practicing the techniques described by Excel At Life, people want to know when they should feel better. This is a difficult question to answer because it requires an assessment of each situation which is why it is best to practice these techniques under the guidance of a MCBT therapist. However, in this article I will discuss what to expect and how to assess your practice. What is Mindfulness-Based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (MCBT)? 1) Cognitive Therapy. First, CBT is a type of treatment that focuses on how you think (cognitive) by examining the accuracy of your thoughts about yourself, others, and the problems you face. Then, when thoughts are found to be an inaccurate appraisal, cognitive therapy helps to change these thoughts by developing a more accurate (or rational) way to think or approach the situation. Once a believable rational has been developed, the idea is to frequently express this new thought to create the new pathway (connections) in the brain. 2) Behavioral Therapy. CBT uses a variety of techniques to help change a person's behavior. These methods can include goal-setting, communication training, relaxation and biofeedback, behavior modification, and exposure methods as well as many others. The commonality of these methods is they are meant to affect the behavior. 3) Mindfulness. Although a technique that has often been included under the behavioral methods of CBT, mindfulness has taken a more prominent role due to its influence upon the other methods and its overall impact in the therapy. Mindfulness is an approach that is present-focused and teaches to refocus when engaged in the depressive or anxious thoughts. 4) Mindfulness-Based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy. CBT has a history of bringing under its umbrella any techniques that have been shown to be effective. Since cognitive therapy, behavioral therapy, and mindfulness have all been shown to be effective, they have been combined into MCBT. So MCBT isn't a new therapy, nor is it necessarily one specific treatment used for all similar cases, but it is the use of a variety of methods that are chosen based upon each individual's problem. Thus, MCBT may look very different for each client because it is specifically designed for each person and problem. If you examine most self-help books you can see the influence of CBT running through them. Similarly, many specific therapies for certain types of problems are often just a set of methods chosen from CBT to address a certain problem. For example, when I have had discussions with DBT (Dialectical Behavioral Therapy) practitioners, I haven't been able to determine the difference between that therapy and MCBT except that DBT spells out certain specific techniques to use for treating trauma. Also, EMDR (eye movement desensitization and reprocessing) uses the CBT methods while adding in the eye movement component but has not been shown to be any more effective than CBT alone (Seidler and Wagner, 2006). I'm not saying that these methods aren't effective. I'm just saying that I would tend to categorize them under the umbrella of MCBT. Some people may swear by the differences they have experienced from these various therapies but I suspect it may be due to individual preference or a difference in the therapists seen by the individual (see my article: Does CBT Lack Compassion? It Depends Upon the Therapist). Expectations of MCBT Too often, the expectations people have regarding treatment may be unrealistic. Understanding what can be expected from treatment can be helpful when assessing the effectiveness of treatment. Generally, the purpose of treatment is to reduce the symptoms to a level where they are manageable and don't interfere with an individual's quality of life. The degree to which this may occur is based upon several considerations: 1) Illness or life problem. Expectations regarding the outcome of MCBT may need to be adjusted based upon whether the anxiety and depression is due to a life problem or due to a mental illness. Certainly, outcomes can be very high for life problems when people are already relatively healthy but need some guidance regarding a specific problem. Although MCBT is effective for mental illness, several caveats need to be considered in terms of expectations: specifically, the concept of cure versus control, degree of effectiveness, and presence of trauma. 2) Cure vs. control. Unfortunately, at this time there is not a cure for these mental illnesses. Some people, based upon their experience, may disagree: I take anti-depressants and I'm doing well, now. However, to understand this concept, it is necessary to define what is the difference between cure and control. A simple way of understanding this is that if a person takes a medication for a certain period of time, gets symptom relief, and then, no longer requires medication, that person would be considered cured. Otherwise, if ongoing medication is required for symptom relief, that would be considered control. For example, someone with diabetes who takes medications and as a result has normal blood sugar would be considered to have controlled diabetes but is not cured because medication is required for ongoing control. Similarly, with MCBT, even though a person may not require ongoing therapy, the person needs to continue using the methods to keep control over the mental illness. Frequently, I have seen that when clients return to therapy after having been successful with previous treatment, it is due to no longer using the methods that had helped them control the symptoms. 3) Degree of effectiveness. Although MCBT is effective, most research shows that it helps about 70-80% of people. What this means is that 20-30% may not experience symptom relief from MCBT. Sometimes this is due to inadequate training and follow-through with the methods. Other times it may be due to the degree of severity. The more serious the mental illness, the more likely a person may be in the group that is not helped. The same thing is true of medications. Although medications are helpful for about 60-70% of people, the more severe the disorder, the less likely medication will provide symptom relief. Therefore, it is important for those with severe depression to use the combination of medication and MCBT to effectively control the symptoms. 4) Trauma. MCBT may need to be adjusted when a person is experiencing depression and anxiety due to having experienced trauma. Trauma-focused MCBT needs to be conducted by a therapist with expertise in these methods. Otherwise, due to the intensity of some of these methods, symptoms could worsen rather than improve. Assessment of MCBT Once you have an understanding of what to expect from your efforts with MCBT, then you can assess whether you are using the best methods, the quality and intensity of your practice, and whether you are engaging in the methods correctly. Again, it is best to have someone with expertise who can help you in this assessment. 1) Quality of practice. The effectiveness of MCBT is directly dependent upon implementing the techniques correctly. Although the techniques often seem simple and direct, it is necessary to fully understand the methods, the purpose, and which are best to achieve desired goals. Quality of practice refers to how well this is attained. In a recent PsychNote, I shared a list of ways to know if you are engaging in quality practice of mindfulness: 1) Mindfulness is not about zoning out or falling asleep. Mindfulness is being aware. 2) Mindfulness does not avoid certain thoughts, emotions, or sensations. 3) Mindfulness isn't an attempt to feel only pleasant emotions or experiences but to be fully open to all experiences. 4) Mindfulness is returning focus to the present-moment experience, whatever it may be, pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. 5) Mindfulness is allowing yourself to return your attention to difficult experiences with a sense that it is okay to experience the emotion or sensation. 6) Mindfulness is a focus on the pure experience of the present moment without distracting thoughts. 7) Mindfulness does not try to push away thoughts or feelings but allows them to be while gently refocusing back to the present moment. Another quality of practice issue regards the implementation of the cognitive techniques. Are you routinely processing your emotions using a method such as the Cognitive Diary whenever you are feeling distressed? Are you able to recognize how the thinking is irrational? If not, do you obtain someone else's opinion? If you don't have access to a therapist, do you consult with someone who has a rational outlook on life? Recognizing irrational thinking is an area that can be very difficult without fully understanding the cognitive therapy concepts and definitions for the different irrational thinking styles. Since the individual with irrational or inaccurate thinking often does not believe the thinking is inaccurate, input from someone else can be very helpful. Finally, the more intense methods of MCBT should NOT be undertaken without a full understanding of the methods and proper guidance. For example, I have seen situations where a family may think that by exposing a person with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) to their fears they are helping, yet such an intense method as exposure treatment without proper preparation and plan may actually cause a worsening of symptoms. 2) Frequency/length of practice. When I worked in hospital-based or day treatment programs, the clients were actively working on the methods hours a day over typically a couple month period. In addition, immediate therapeutic assistance was available. Therefore, the programs were fairly effective even with serious disorders (still not in all cases, though). It is unlikely that an outpatient program approaches this level of intensity. What to keep in mind, however, is that the more intense the treatment, the more quickly it is likely to work. If your practice is somewhat infrequent, it is likely to take much longer to experience change. I typically recommend that clients engage in their treatment assignments a couple hours a day if they want to see change more quickly. Although I rarely see this level of commitment, even less intense efforts often will eventually show some result. 3) Lifestyle change. One of the main ways to assess your efforts is to determine how much you are creating lifestyle changes. For instance, is your rational thinking becoming a more automatic approach to addressing problems? Is your mindfulness practice becoming an attitude, a way of focusing even when you are not practicing? How would you rate your degree of mindfulness throughout your day? The more that you have developed healthy automatic thoughts, behavior, and lifestyle practices, the more likely you will experience long-term symptom relief. What if You are Not Engaging in Quality Practice? 1) Obtain education. If you assess your MCBT practice and believe that your quality of practice could be improved, the first step is to obtain further education. Plenty of education materials are available so read books or take online classes that teach the MCBT materials. 2) Obtain another perspective. You may need someone else to assess what is needed in your practice. If you have been seeing a therapist, sometimes it is helpful for you and your therapist to obtain a consultation from another therapist with expertise in your problem. A fresh perspective can sometimes provide more effective direction. 3) Assess medication. Most people are aware to assess the effectiveness of medication and whether another medication may be more appropriate. However, an issue that is often not addressed is that medication can sometimes make a problem worse. For example, the benzodiazapines (Xanax, Valium, etc.) often used for anxiety disorders can have rebound effects when they are used long-term resulting in increased anxiety. I have seen a number of clients who improved when they reduced their dependence upon these medications. However, do not stop medications without your physician's guidance. References Seider, G.H. and Wagner, F.E. (2006). Comparing the Efficacy of EMDR and Trauma-focused Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy in the Treatment of PTSD: A Meta-analytic Study. Psychological Medicine, 36, 1515-1522. Doi: 10.1017/S0033291706007963 Copyright 2014 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles For Women Only: How to Have the Relationship of Your Dreams by Monica A. Frank, Ph.D. "If women could learn to ask for what they want and ask often, many women could have the relationship of their dreams." Tweet If women could just change one thing, they would find that they could have almost everything they want in a relationship. Of course, I'm talking about women who are married to the average decent non-abusive man. I don't know how often I've heard a woman say, "But I shouldn't have to ask." Frequently, they have all sorts of expectations of their partner and become resentful and angry when he doesn't fulfill those expectations. However, when I ask what he said when they asked for what they wanted, they either respond with "I shouldn't have to ask" or with "I told him once. I shouldn't have to keep telling him." These attitudes are self-defeating and often destructive to a relationship. If women could learn to ask for what they want and ask often, many women could have the relationship of their dreams. When I tell women this, then they typically respond, "But he'll think I'm nagging him." The problem with this thinking is that women don't understand how men communicate. Men are usually very direct in their communication. When they talk with one another they say exactly what they want. A man would say to a friend, "I'm going to be near your office today. Let's meet for lunch." A woman is more likely to say especially when talking to a man," I have an appointment near your office today," hoping that the man will get the hint and suggest lunch. This may be a reasonable approach if the woman doesn't know the man very well and wants to test his interest without making a full commitment. However, the problem is women use the same approach with their husbands! "But I shouldn't have to ask." No matter how much women may espouse equal rights and feminism, the reality is that men and women still grow up learning different ways of thinking and of approaching the world around them. In fact, the reason women have broke through more barriers in the workplace than at home is because women's demands have been more explicit. "We want equal pay for equal work." Men understand this type of direct request and therefore know how to respond. Men usually want to please the woman they love. I teach my clients that the only thing that is important in a relationship is whether her partner is willing to be responsive to her requests. Fortunately, I learned this fairly early in my relationship with my husband although it still took me several years. Every year on my birthday we had a major fight because I was hurt and angry that he didn't celebrate my birthday in the way I thought he should. He just seemed confused by my attitude because he thought that he was trying to make me happy. Gradually, I realized that he grew up in a family that didn't celebrate birthdays. Then I noticed that he seemed to handle Valentine's Day and Mother's Day very well. I wondered what was the difference? It finally occurred to me that the reason he did so well on those holidays is because they were advertised. And only that, but the advertisements told him exactly what to do. I then understood that my husband truly did want to please me but he just didn't know how. So I started advertising several weeks before my birthday and we haven't had a problem about my birthday since. If women can get past the self-defeating thinking of expecting men to know what they want without telling them, they could be more satisfied with their relationships. Men do not think they are being nagged when a woman a makes a repeated direct request. Men consider it nagging when the woman becomes irritated and approaches him with criticism, "Why can't you do anything I ask?" Women often become frustrated when a man agrees to a request but doesn't follow through. However, if women would make a direct request explicit they can often prevent the need to make repeated requests. For instance, a request of "Please take out the garbage" means that the man can do it at his leisure. However, if a woman says "This garbage is almost overflowing. Please take it out now," the man understands the immediacy of her request. He then has the option of doing it or letting her know he is unable to do so. However, for the most part, men are willing to be response to their partners and if the woman can learn to be more direct she will probably be more satisfied with her relationship. Once a woman has learned to be more direct, there is one other thing she can do that will assure her of creating the relationship she desires. Men respond extremely well to positive reinforcement. Unlike women, men grow up in a very competitive environment. Their self-image is based on comparison to others. They dream of being admired for their talents and successes. When they are unable to achieve status in one area, they logically assess the probability of success and may choose to focus on something that is more attainable. What happens when this thinking is applied to marriages? If a man is frequently criticized and he perceives himself as trying to please his wife, he comes to believe that he is incapable of satisfying her. However, he is trapped due to the commitment he made which is also very important to him. Therefore, he begins to focus more on activities which are more rewarding to him such as work or sports. His wife perceives him as withdrawing from her and frantically tries to engage him: "You don't talk to me anymore." However, these attempts are seen by the man as criticisms and he further concludes that he can't please his wife. Thus starts a vicious cycle. The interesting thing, though, in this process is that typically the man truly does want to please his wife. But he doesn't know how. The reason he doesn't know how is that criticism tells a person what they are not doing correctly, but it doesn't tell them what to do to improve. This is where positive reinforcement comes into play. When a woman gives her partner positive comments she is accomplishing a couple of things. First, she is creating the feeling in him that he had when they first met; the feeling that he is the most important person in the world to her and that she admires him. When a wife does this well, he is also more likely to listen to her when she makes a request. Second, positive reinforcement teaches him what she wants from him. He then feels successful and is likely to do what pleases her even more. Frequently, when I make this suggestion to women they tell me, "But he doesn't do anything that I could reinforce." I find this difficult to believe and tell them that they need to reinforce even small moves in the right direction or to reinforce things that they have always liked about him but just take for granted. "I admire you because you are such a hard worker." "I like the way that shirt looks on you." "Your hugs make me feel so good." "That's really helpful to me when you put your glass in the dishwasher." "Thanks for taking the trash out. It gives me time to get other things done." "You have got to be the best husband in the world." Unfortunately, a few years ago with the women's liberation movement, women were told that they shouldn't have to thank a man for doing his share because thanking him implied that he was assisting her rather than doing what he was supposed to do anyway. This type of thinking is very dysfunctional because it only accomplishes divisiveness and resentment. Even when he does something that he does everyday or that he should do, positive reinforcement makes him feel valued and more likely to continue. Also, we tend to like to be around people who make us feel important and successful. At first, if might feel awkward to change the communication to focus more on the positives, but the best thing about positive reinforcement is that it creates a positive cycle. The woman will frequently find that her husband will start to give her positive reinforcement in return because she is teaching him how to do it through example. This creates a more natural cycle over time. Copyright 2000 by Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to reprint this article for non-commercial use is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Tweet Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe to Newsletter Home Articles Apps Audios Tests Excel At LifeContents Home About▼ About Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy Referrals On the Web Apps Articles▼ Index Anxiety/Stress Assertion CBT Depression Jealousy Mindfulness Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Rules of Life Self-Concept Sport Psychology Wellness Audios▼ Index Audio Articles Relaxation Mindfulness Meditation For Children Energizing Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief Motivational SportPsych Cognitive Diary Examples Questionnaires▼ Index Cognitive Styles Test Your Happiness Assessment Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity Passive-Aggressive Q&A PsychNotes Topics Anxiety CBT Depression Conflict Goal Setting Happiness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Self-esteem SportPsych Wellness Copyright 2003-2022 Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Home Contact About Terms of Use Privacy Policy Comments Policy On the Web Referrals PsychNotes Passive-Aggressive Q&A Assertion Cognitive Diary Examples 50 Rules of Life Mindfulness Self-Concept Irrational Thinking Depression Stress and Anxiety Wellness Jealousy Motivation Relationships Resolving Conflict Sport Psychology Audio Articles > CBT Anxiety Happiness Wellness PsychNews Relaxation Motivational For Children Meditation Energizing Assistance > Rational Thinking Exercise Motivational Audios Self-Esteem Exercise Panic Assistance Depression Assistance Jealousy Assistance Stress Education PTSD and Abuse OCD Weight Control Managing Anger Managing Insomnia Choosing Happiness Mindfulness Practice Emotion Training Quick Stress Relief SportPsych Qi Gong Videos Relationships > Marital Disillusionment Attachment Security Incentive/Threat Sensitivity Personality > Leadership Perfectionism Sociability Self-Concept > Self-Efficacy Self-Esteem Cognitive Styles > Cognitive Styles Test Locus of Control Motivational Styles Generalization Your Happiness Assessment Satisfaction With Life Depression Generalized Anxiety Social Anxiety Rejection Sensitivity > Adult Young Adult Appearance Popular Articles Crazy-Makers: Dealing with Passive-Aggressive People Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! When You Have Been Betrayed Struggling to Forgive: An Inability to Grieve Happy Habits: 50 Suggestions The Secret of Happiness: Let It Find You (But Make the Effort) Excellence vs. Perfection Depression is Not Sadness 20 Steps to Better Self-Esteem 7 Rules and 8 Methods for Responding to Passive-aggressive People What to Do When Your Jealousy Threatens to Destroy Your Marriage Happiness is An Attitude Guide to How to Set Achieveable Goals Catastrophe? Or Inconvenience? Popular Audios Panic Assistance Motivational Audios Mindfulness Training Rational Thinking Relaxation for Children Loving Kindness Meditation Self-Esteem Exercise Lies You Were Told Choosing Happiness Audio Version of Article: Crazy-Makers: Passive-Aggressive People Audio Version of Article: Why Are People Mean? Don't Take It Personally! Audio Version of Article: Happiness Is An Attitude All Audio Articles Insomnia Education If you use these audios, please support their development. Just $1 for each audio you use could greatly help with creating more audios! Okay, tell me how! Listen Download Share Tweet Managing Insomnia The most common cause of insomnia is not being able to quiet the mind. This audio provides education to learn how to address the thinking that occurs for many people who experience insomnia. Even if the cause of your insomnia may be physical, learning some of the methods to quiet the mind and improve sleep can still be helpful. In addition to this audio, the mindfulness techniques can be helpful for insomnia. Also, if worry is the main cause of your insomnia, the Worry Box audio and Excel At Life's Android app, Worry Box--Anxiety Self-Help, and learning how to put worries away before you go to bed can be helpful. Be sure to check out the relaxation audios. TRANSCRIPT Listen Transcript: Insomnia Education The most common cause of insomnia is not being able to quiet the mind. The reasons for this can vary and it is important to recognize what may be contributing to your sleep problems. This audio is to help you understand some of the causes for insomnia which is difficulty falling asleep either initially or if you wake in the middle of the night. First, it is important to understand the mechanism of sleep. It is easier to sleep and you will obtain a more refreshing sleep, the more physically and mentally relaxed you are. However, too often people engage in thinking or activities at bedtime that are stimulating rather than relaxing which then interfere with sleep. Obviously, this varies for each person so it is important to understand what are your obstacles to sleeping well. Sometimes people think something is relaxing when it is actually stimulating. For instance, many people think watching TV is relaxing. However, TV is stimulating to the brain. Even if what you are watching is quiet or boring, the brain is still being stimulated by the lights and the sound. Some people say they can fall asleep better with the TV. However, they are less likely to get good rest and are more likely to toss and turn or have disturbing dreams. Also, some people believe that having an alcoholic beverage at bedtime can relax them and help them sleep. However, this may be similar to TV in that it helps them fall asleep but sleep is not very restful and they are more likely to wake early and not be able to return to sleep. Some medications can do the same thing, even some that are prescribed to help relax the body. Also, most people are aware not to use stimulants such as caffeine close to bedtime. Anything that creates physical or mental tension can interfere with sleep and cause insomnia. Therefore, it is important to learn good sleep hygiene and how to truly relax the body and the brain. One of the top reasons for insomnia or waking in the middle of the night is worry. There can be several ways this can occur. Some people tend to worry all the time which increases overall tension and prevents being able to relax and fall asleep easily. Also, if you do fall asleep while worrying your mind is still in an agitated state and so you are not likely to rest well and more likely to wake up easily in the middle of the night. For people who tend to worry all the time, it is important to find methods to manage worry. Another audio I've created called The Worry Box can help teach you how to put worries away. In addition, it is helpful to focus more on physically relaxing the body. Some people don't worry all the time, but may have the style of avoiding worries by distracting themselves with activity. Frequently, when people are busy all day they don't have much time to think. However, for these people, when they wind down at night and have some quiet time, worry types of thoughts are more likely to appear. This style of avoiding thoughts throughout the day often leads to increased worries at night. If this is your style, you may need to try and address problems during the day rather than avoiding them. Other people engage in a general review of worries when they have quiet time at night. Sometimes they do this because they think it helps them solve problems. It is true that having quiet time to think about problems can lead to solutions. However, this is not helpful at night. Thinking about problems tends to be agitating and creates tension which is not conducive to good sleep. In general, when going to bed it is important to learn to refocus away from the worries. You can do this by focusing on methods to physically relax the body such as listening to a relaxation audio or mindfully focusing on your breathing. You can also refocus away from worries by challenging the thoughts. For instance, you can tell yourself There is nothing so important that I need to think about it now. If it is important, I can focus on what I will do about it during the day. But right now there is nothing I can do about it. I can let it go now because there is nothing to do now. Many people who have insomnia worry about not getting a good night's sleep. Frequently, they create a self-fulfilling prophecy of not being able to sleep. They will think I'm not going to be able to sleep tonight. I'll just toss and turn all night and then I will feel horrible tomorrow. I'll just be miserable tomorrow and won't be able to get anything done. This type of thinking creates tension, both mental tension and muscular tension. Such tension is likely to interfere with sleep and certainly will prevent refreshing sleep. If you have this type of thinking, it is important to change it. You can prevent this self-fulfilling prophecy the more you believe, It doesn't matter how I feel tomorrow. I will cope with it. I have before and I will again. I can still do things even when I am not at my best. It is not the end of the world if I don't sleep. So instead of worrying about sleep, I will just enjoy some relaxation. If I sleep, I sleep. If I don't, I don't. Some people have trouble sleeping because they are annoyed that they have to waste time sleeping. Usually, these people are demanding perfectionists. Such annoyance makes it more difficult to quiet the mind and relax. In this is the case for you, it may be necessary to create a different attitude about quiet time in general. You may need to tell yourself I will be able to accomplish more if I take care of myself. That means I need to relax and give my body the time to recuperate from sleep. Slowing down, doing nothing at times, and relaxing will help me function at my best. Right now there is nothing that I can accomplish. So I will focus on letting myself enjoy some relaxation. By developing such an attitude and engaging in relaxation methods, you will reduce agitation and have a much more restful sleep. What I have described in this audio is the cognitive and behavioral methods of addressing insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral therapy has been found to be the most effective treatment for insomnia, even more so that sleep medications. The problem with medications is that they often lead to an unhealthy sleep cycle due to side effects the next day whereas cognitive-behavioral therapy doesn't have side effects. In summary, the following steps will help you fall asleep faster and get a better night's rest: One, if you have any of the thinking styles described above, change them by repeating the challenging thoughts frequently. To get the repetition, you can even listen to this audio repeatedly until you create the thinking more automatically. Two, engage in good sleep hygiene. This can involve a number of things, but primarily, do not engage in stimulating behavior. This can be reading an exciting book, watching tv, or eating certain kinds of foods. Also, develop a sleep routine that is effective for you. Three, use relaxation methods at bedtime that quiet the mind and the body. Try different methods to find what works best for you. Initially, it may take a bit to get your body re-adjusted and to change some of the thinking. However, as you do so, you will be rewarded with a better quality sleep and less insomnia. Copyright 2013 Excel At Life, LLC. Permission to post this article is granted if it includes this entire copyright and an active link. Recent Articles Newest Audios Kindle Books byDr. Monica Frank Recent Articles Analyzing Your Moods, Symptoms, and Events with Excel At Life's Mood Log Why You Get Anxious When You Don't Want To Why People Feel Grief at the Loss of an Abusive Spouse or Parent Are You Depressed?: Understanding Diagnosis and Treatment 15 Coping Statements for Panic and Anxiety Beyond Tolerating Emotions: Becoming Comfortable with Discomfort Emotion Training: What is it and How Does it Work? How You Can Be More Resistant to Workplace Bullying Are You Passive Aggressive and Want to Change? When Your Loved One Refuses Help Newest Audios Building Blocks Emotion Training Hot Springs Relaxation 5 Methods to Managing Anger Panic Assistance While Driving Autogenic Relaxation Training Rainbow Sandbox Mindfulness Mindfulness Training Scroll Copyright 2003-2022 by Excel At Life, LLC, Missouri, USA Site Last Modified: June 19, 2022 Subscribe to Newsletter
